Title: 3 Secrets to Ochsner Hospital System Success_Hm5FHhBBkms
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hm5FHhBBkms
Language: en
Duration: 12:24
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the three secrets to Ochsner Health's success. Now, the Ochsner Health System is in the New Orleans, Louisiana area and it's across the Gulf South and it's a massive health system with over 40 facilities among their hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, etc. Now, they did something amazing for 500,000 of their patients, half a million of their patient population where they were able to lower cost and increase the quality of care in a financially viable fashion.

Let's talk about what they did. First of all, they lowered the cost of care in just one year, the most recent year, by $56 million and then they took $45 million of that $56 million that they saved and they used it to pay the providers. They paid the doctors and the nurses and the physical therapists, etc. They paid those providers bonuses because of all the money that they saved. Now, how did they do this? Okay, so this is secret number one is they actually strategically intended to decrease ER visits and decrease inpatient hospitalizations.

That's right. They actually did not want as many ER visits. They did not want as many hospitalizations. They moved care outside of the four walls of the hospital and into the outpatient setting to be more proactive instead of reactive. And they used data and analytics to target specific people and populations and to target specific pathology within those people. And they used primary care to effectively establish relationships and modify behavior and treat chronic diseases. And they used outpatient care coordination so that if the person did need specialist care, it was well coordinated among the specialists and the primary care physicians.

And as a result, they actually had decreased ER visits and decreased hospitalizations and they saved a ton of money. Now, secret number two is that Ochsner took risk. So secret number one is you move out of the four walls of the hospital and then secret number two is to take risk. Now, let's actually run the math on this to show how the math on taking risk works. Okay. So just imagine hypothetically that we've got a hundred million dollars of premium for 10,000 patients, which means on average, those patients are having $10,000 per patient per year of premium.

Now that premium is then divided amongst, let's say the insurance companies keep an 8 million of that, but 60 million is going to Ochsner in fee for service payments. And then 32 million is going to other hospitals and doctors in the South, uh, in fee for service payments as well. Okay. So that's the old model. That's the old fee for service model. That is the pre savings, pre innovation model. Okay. So what you do is, is then, okay, so you've got $92 million that's being spent on patient care divided by the 10,000 patients.

That means that there's $9,200 per patient per year that's being spent on actual care. And then the insurance companies keep an $8 million. Okay, fine. Now in the new model where Ochsner takes risk, Ochsner says, look, we'll actually take care of all the entire patient population in order to own, in order to decrease the total cost of care, you need to own the total care. And that's what Ochsner did. So look, we'll take risk on this, but we need to own the total care. And so as a result, that 32 million that was going to all those other outside hospitals, like that went away.

And so what they were able to do, what Ochsner was able to do was by going outside of the four walls, they were able to decrease the cost of patient care from fee for service, $9,200 per patient per year to $8,500 per patient per year. Now these are hypothetical numbers, but I want you to see how the math works to show how Ochsner can actually make more money by saving money. Okay. So look at this, the cost per patient, the total cost of care per patient went down from $9,200 per patient to $8,500 per patient.

But look, the amount of money that Ochsner brought in as revenue went up from $60 million to $85 million because they were taking care of a larger panel of patients. And that's the key that the more efficient, the more effective hospital system sees more patients so that the total cost of care on average per patient is less, but the total amount of revenue that the hospital system is bringing is more because they are taking care of more patients. And oh, by the way, they're not taking care of those patients in the hospital, in the ER.

They're taking care of those patients in the outpatient setting. The hospital is like, well, all these hospitals like, well, we're at capacity. We can't have any more patients. Ochsner's like, we want more patients because we don't have to hospitalize them. Like we don't want people to be hospitalized. We want them to be healthy. We can take care of more patients in the outpatient setting. Give us more patients. That's what we want. Okay. So, and then in this situation, look at this, the insurance company, they make more money too.

All those greedy insurance companies, we don't want them making more money. Look, they went from making $8 million to $15 million. They actually maxed out their medical loss ratio such that the full $85 million was going out to Ochsner and $15 million was being kept by, in this case, Blue Cross of Louisiana. Okay. Again, these are hypothetical numbers. But the point is, is that this was done not by shortchanging care. This was done by actually improving care in the outpatient setting. Let me give you specific stats around that.

The percentage of diabetics with a controlled hemoglo, with controlled diabetes, with a hemoglobin A1c of 7% or less was 88% for this 500,000 person population. Okay. The national average is only 50 to 60%. It was dramatically better diabetic control at Ochsner versus the average for the country. Now get this for hypertension. 85% of patients with hypertension had their blood pressure controlled. Guess what that number is nationally on average? It's 20%. That's right. This is a huge travesty of healthcare in America.

Only 20% of people with hypertension actually have their blood pressure controlled. Why is that so important? Because the two of the main risk factors for heart attack and stroke are uncontrolled diabetes and uncontrolled hypertension. So I guarantee you that Ochsner actually decreased the number of MIs on average per patient and decreased the number of strokes on average per patient by improving diabetes and hypertension control. And that's really secret number three is, is that they decreased pathology.

That's right. They decreased disease. They decreased suffering. They decreased death. That's the whole point. That's the whole point of healthcare finance. I don't care about the money. What I care about is decreasing the pathology. And they, this gets me to a Peter Drucker quote, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the famous, um, uh, business consultant thinker, if you will, where Peter Drucker said, it is completely useless to do more efficiently what should not be done at all. And so this is where so many hospital systems in America are saying, look, we're up, we're operating at max efficiency.

We can't cut any more fat because we're just going to cut muscle. And if you decrease our reimbursement, it's just a race to the bottom. Every time I hear about lowering healthcare costs, every single hospital person I talk to says, Oh, it's just a race to the bottom. That's not the point. The point is not to more efficiently treat the pathology. The point is to prevent the pathology from ever happening in the first place. And Ochsner actually took on that responsibility of decreasing the pathology in the first place.

And they made a ton of money off of it. Look at that. Okay. So you can have the financial incentives align with dramatic improvement in patient health. That's the whole point. That's why we're doing this, which brings me to my last point. Why in the world is Ochsner doing this? Why is this happening in the Bayou of Louisiana? Why isn't this happening in New York? Why isn't this happening in Boston? Why isn't this happening in Chicago? Why isn't this happening in Dallas? Why? I had a call with some of the executives at Ochsner and they told me something fascinating.

They said, you know what, Dr. Bricker, we don't have a lot of commercially insured patients in the Gulf South. Like we don't really have a ton of people on employer sponsored plans. Like we got some, but like most of our patients, they're on Medicare and Medicaid. So like we looked at our payer mix. We looked at our financials and we're like, huh, we're not really in good shape. So we better, in other words, they don't have very good payers, right? Because remember commercial insurance, employer sponsored insurance plans, they paid two, three, four, 500% of Medicare.

Meanwhile, they're just getting Medicare rates. And for Medicaid, they're getting like less than Medicare rates. So they were getting such dinky reimbursement on all their ER visits and their inpatient hospitalizations. They're like, well, we got to do something to prevent that. So notice that. It was the lack of high employer reimbursement that incentivized Ochsner to do this. So in a way, the employers of America are enabling the other hospital systems in America to maintain their passive approach to not preventing pathology, to not preventing heart attacks and strokes.

So that's a whole nother conversation on another day. But just know that the lack of employer sponsored reimbursement in Louisiana and the Gulf South is actually what caused Ochsner to do this. And they turned that straw into gold. Okay. And I mean, it's I mean, I'm, I'm like, I'm on the verge of tears. It's so wonderful. Okay, so fine. So listen, this is no good. Listen, people in Louisiana are poor. This is no criticism of them. But it's the fact of the matter is right. So the average household income in the New Orleans area is $64,000 per household per year.

Okay, 70% of the households in the New Orleans, Louisiana metro area are below the national average for household income. So the majority of the people in that in the New Orleans area, they don't make as much as as the the middle of America. Okay, and then the percentage of people in Louisiana who live below the federal poverty limit is 16%. Okay, nationally, it's 11%. So they've got a lot more people living below the poverty level in Louisiana than they then the rest of the country has. Again, this is not a judgment.

And we're not here to like this to solve poverty. That is beyond the scope of this video today. But the point is, is that they were able to take that situation that they were in and they were able to bloom where they were where they were planted and decrease the number of heart attacks and strokes and improve people's lives. It's absolutely amazing. So what are the three secrets? The three secrets are one, move out of the hospital to take risk, three, decrease pathology, one, move out to take risk, three, decrease pathology, I'm gonna say it one more time, move out, take risk, decrease pathology, decrease pathology.

And that's what I wanted to share with you today on A Healthcare Z. Thank you so much for watching..

