Title: 4 Keys to Patient Navigation_t9VglVWHwik
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t9VglVWHwik
Language: en
Duration: 12:35
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the four keys to patient navigation. That's right, today we're going to talk about healthcare navigation because the entire navigation thing didn't exist not that many years ago and as one of the co-founders of Compass Professional Health Services, we were actually one of the original patient navigation companies. So the company we started, Compass Professional Health Services, grew to support 1.8 million members and we supported customers for 11 years before selling our company to Alight Solutions.

So now the service is called Alight Solutions and we had about 2,000 employer clients across the country that made up those 1.8 million members. So we provided our navigation services to employer sponsored plans. Now what the co-founder and I, we originally had this idea back in the summer of 2001, back when I was still in medical school, we were going to call it Healthcare Angels. It was sort of a ridiculous name. So smartly we changed the name of that. Now, at the same time, other people were coming up with this same navigation idea.

So I'm in no way, shape or form saying that we quote invented navigation because we did not. Lots of other people had the same idea that we did at about the same time. Now we started our company in about 2007. So that's what, 17 years ago. But now navigation services are used all over the place. It's a thing. That's point number one. Navigation is a valuable service within healthcare. It's a thing. Who uses navigation, patient navigation? Accountable care organizations use navigation. Patient navigators are a central piece of the Methodist health system, ACO here in Dallas, Texas.

Who else? Onsite clinics use patient navigation. So there's a company that's called ProactiveMD that does a whole bunch of onsite clinics across the country and they use navigators as part of their onsite clinic solution. Next up, Medicare Advantage uses patient navigation. So there's a company called Devoted Health where one of the key things that they do for their members on their Medicare Advantage plan is they have patient navigators. Next up, oncology. They have disease specific patient navigators. So oncology, because it's so complex between the medical oncologist, the radiation oncologist, the surgical oncologist, all the different things you got to deal with, all the prior authorizations for the chemo and the radiation, et cetera, et cetera, they use patient navigation.

Specifically, the Memorial Hermann Healthcare System in Houston has 20 dedicated oncology patient navigators across their health system. Employers use patient navigation. In addition to our company Compass now alike, there's other navigation companies out there too. Medicaid uses navigation. So there is a company called CityBlock Health where one of the central ways that they provide care for people on Medicaid is through patient navigation. So it's a thing. Now, what are the other things that we learned at Compass across those 1.8 million members for 11 years that I want to share with you today? Next, we had a tremendous cross-sectional view of patients.

I would essentially meet with employers and benefit consultants and I would tell them how plan members use their health insurance and the healthcare system because they can only see it for their particular employee population. And we had this huge cross-sectional view. We literally had members in all 50 states from Anchorage to Miami. Okay. So what are some of the geographic ways that patient navigation is unique? In other words, you don't navigate people in healthcare the same throughout the country. It's different in different parts of the country.

Let me give you a specific example. In the Northeast, from Washington DC to Maine, they generally don't use a lot of primary care physicians. For employer-sponsored plans, most people have PPO plans and they kind of directly access specialists. They got a skin issue, they go to a dermatologist. They got a sinus issue, they go to an ENT. They got a urinary tract issue, they go to a urologist. Like they don't really go to a primary care physician first. Now, one of the reasons for that is because believe it or not, the states that have the highest concentrations of physicians are all in the Northeast.

So if you, I'll leave a link in the show notes. If you look at the stats of like physicians per 100,000 people, all the states in the Northeast, it's greater than 300 physicians. In some places like Massachusetts, it's greater than 400 physicians per 100,000 of population. Okay. In the rest of the country, it's less than 3000. Okay. Less than 300. In almost all, in California, it's in the 200s. In Texas, it's in the 200s. In Florida, it's in the 200s. In some states, it's in the 100s. There's just a lot of doctors in the Northeast.

Specifically, there's a lot of specialists in the Northeast. And so I'm not going to say correlation is causation, but people in the Northeast use a lot of specialist care and there are a lot of specialists in the Northeast. So what's the implication of that? The implication is, is that look, if you're trying to do some sort of primary care strategy in the Northeast as an employer, like that's going to be weird. Okay. All the employees are like, I don't go to a primary care physician. Whereas in the Midwest, in the South, in the West, if you say, Hey, you should go to a primary care physician.

They'd be like, okay, I kind of get that. That's what people around here do. Okay. Next up, the types of specialties that navigators are used with, it stratifies. Okay. So not everybody uses physicians the same. So when people are like looking for a doctor, what is the number one doctor that a navigator can help a patient find? Well, for the rest of the country outside of the Northeast, it's a primary care physician. So the number one type of doctor that is searched. So when people are like, Hey, navigator, I need help finding a doctor.

The type of doctor they're looking for is a primary care physician. Now, interestingly, the second most common types of doctors that patients are asking their navigators to help them find are either OBGYNs or orthopedists. They are number two and they're tied for number two. Makes a lot of sense. Women have an OBGYN and a musculoskeletal problems are very common in the working age population. Now, interestingly, the third most frequent types of physicians that people search for is literally everything else.

Like gastroenterologist, cardiologist, dermatologist, ENT, neurology, you name it. They're essentially all tied. Okay. So just know that when your patients need quote unquote navigation services, it's highly stratified toward primary care, OBGYN and ortho. So you're like, well, I don't know how to help all these people help all these specialists. Like that's okay. You can prioritize it. Okay. And the way you prioritize it is primary care, OBGYN and ortho because that's what they want. Okay. The next thing that we learned at Compass for patient navigation is that the most important things for navigation, get this in the patient's mind, the most important thing for navigation were time and location.

Okay. In other words, they want to, I want to be seen now. Okay. So the speed of being seen was, was like one of the two most important things. Okay. It wasn't the gender of the doctor. It wasn't the experience of the doctor. It wasn't anything else. It's just like, can I get in fast? That's what they were looking for. Okay. They wanted to get in within seven days. So literally finding appointment availability was one of the huge values that we provided at Compass. It's one of the huge values like scheduling. Okay. The fancy, you know, academic public health term for that is access.

Just getting in the door is difficult and people need help just getting an appointment. So before you get into all these like complex imaginations, it's like, just get them an appointment. That's what they need. That's what they want. Next up, the location of the service was also hugely important. So it's like, okay, I want to be seen like tomorrow. Okay. Next, I want it to be close. The location needed to be close. And interestingly, the reason why it needed to be close is because the people wanted, the patients wanted to be familiar with the location and they wanted it to be easy.

Okay. Believe it or not, fear is a huge problem in like most people. Look, 84% of people have an irrational fear. I'll leave a link in the show notes. Okay. So like a definition of xenophobia isn't fear of people you don't know. Xenophobia can be defined as like fear of the unknown. Guess what? A lot of people are fearful of like when they're driving, they don't know where to go. Even with like GPS, they're like, well, I don't really know that neighborhood. I don't really know the highways. I don't know the roads. And like people really don't like that.

And that hugely impacts how and where they access care. So like timeliness and location were super important. The other super important thing about location is that two thirds of people will not do something if it's too hard. So you needed to make the location easy to get to because you're like, oh, here's a doctor and they're in this part of town and they'll be like, look, that's too hard. So you know what they're going to do? They're just going to not go. Okay. So you've got to hugely take into account time and location, time and location in your patient navigation.

Okay. Finally, when you're dealing with healthcare navigation, it is highly female driven. Patient navigation means interacting with women. Hugely important. Okay. 80% of medical decisions in a household are made by a woman. It's the woman for herself. It's the woman for her kids. And it's the woman for her significant other spouse person that they're living with. Okay. So why is that important? When you're communicating between the patient navigator and the woman, because 80% of the time, it'll be a woman. Okay. Then men and women communicate differently.

And I'm not here. I listen, the irony is not lost on me that I, as a man, I'm talking about communicating with women. Okay. I'll freely admit that I'm horrible at it, but I'm at least smart enough to know that I'm horrible at it. And so I talked to other women about how to communicate with women. Okay, fine. So women, and you know, I'll leave a link in the, in the study, uh, in the show notes in regards to the study, but women, as compared to men, they communicate oftentimes to establish relationship. The relationship between the woman and the other person that they're communicating with is hugely important.

Whereas for men, it's much more transactional for men. It's most more like, I want to exert dominance, or I just want to like get information out of you. And that's kind of it. It's a transaction. Whereas women are just born connectors, which is great. Okay. Okay. So as a result, what does that mean for like the patient navigation? You need to have the same navigator so that the woman can actually establish a relationship with the same person. If you're giving them a different person every time or giving them an app with no human connection whatsoever, then like that communication is going to be hugely ineffective.

So the communication needs to be hugely relationship driven. Now that communication could be over phone. It could be over email. It can be over text. It can be in person. So we live in a modern age. We can use modern routes of communication, but we need to understand that establishing a relationship with the largely female patient, or in this case, if it's like, um, it's a man, it's, it's there again, it's there, it's their, it's their spouse, significant other, what have you that is frankly like telling the man what to do, you know, right, wrong, or indifferent.

That's just largely how it works. Okay. So the, and this is just the tip of the iceberg. We learned so much about how people navigate healthcare through our 11 years of experience and our 1.8 million members at Compass that I at least wanted to just begin to share some of the many things that we learned. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

