Title: 4 Step Plan to Lower Hospital Healthcare Costs_6mkLuY8rKLU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6mkLuY8rKLU
Language: en
Duration: 6:12
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is hospitals must survive, but how? And to start off, we need to review some basics of hospital finance. And this actually comes from a previous A Healthcare Z video did that's called hospital cross-subsidization. And here we have Medicare and Medicaid and commercial insurance revenue and expense. So let me briefly go over this. Okay, so Medicare and Medicaid provide hospitals in aggregate in America, they pay them about $470 billion.

Now, these hospitals actually, it costs them the expense to take care of all those Medicare and Medicaid folks is $540 billion. So in other words, these hospitals lose money on their Medicare and Medicaid patients. Now, the majority of that is actually Medicare. It's not Medicaid, right? So in other words, the hospitals are underpaid by Medicare and Medicaid by on average 15%. All right, and I have sources to these in the previous show notes. Okay, next up. So then commercial insurance, they pay in aggregate U.S.

hospitals $505 billion. And the expense for taking care of all those commercially insured patients with Blue Cross, United, Cigna, Aetna, etc, etc, is $322 billion. So in other words, the commercial insurance overpays by 57%. And then the hospitals then use this overpayment to cross-subsidize the underpayment by Medicare and Medicaid. Okay, this is well established. This is not a new fact. However, there's an excellent article from the Harvard Business Review from 2017 from two gentlemen, actually from a hospital consulting firm called Navigant, that pointed out an excellent point, which I'm sure all of you know as well, that the government money situation for a hospital is going to get worse because there is a 3% increase in Medicare enrollees every year for the next decade.

And that only goes down to like a 2.5% increase per year to the point that the 55 million people that are on Medicare today will increase to 81.5 million by the year 2030. Okay, so in other words, all of this underpayment to the hospitals is going to increase because the number of Medicare patients that they're going to have is going to increase. So it's only going to get worse. And so what is going to happen, what has been happening, what can continue to happen is that the cross-subsidization required from commercial insurance to make up for this underpayment is going to increase.

It's going to get worse. Essentially, and I'm going to be kind of harsh here, the hospitals are addicted to commercial insurance payments. They're addicted to this relationship. Now, it doesn't have to be that way. And in fact, employers are actually, to a certain extent, we're enabling this behavior. And to a certain extent, the insurance carriers are enabling this behavior. We're letting this happen. So I'm not pointing the finger at hospitals. I'm saying, look, we've got to do two things. We have to, one, stop enabling this behavior.

And then two, offer an alternative. We can't just stop the enablement and just say, figure it out for them for yourself, hospitals, because you got to survive. Hospitals are not the enemy. They have to survive. They have to survive in a different way, but they need to survive. And so the authors of this Harvard Review, Harvard Business Review article outlined four ways the hospital is going to do that. So number one, there's actually a five to 15% expense reduction opportunity in care and administration by using analytics to decrease waste.

Hospitals are, again, not to be overcritical, are cesspools of waste. And if they actually use their data the way most corporations do to analyze that waste, then there's a five to 15% reduction expense opportunity for that calculated by them. Okay, next up, there's an opportunity to decrease their corporate service expenses. What do I mean by corporate service expenses? I mean legal, compliance, HR, and IT. Oh, by the way, HR is the health benefits for the employees themselves. Because healthcare for people that work at hospitals is expensive.

Okay, so those corporate services are actually 15% of a hospital's overall expenses, and it's been rising at 10% per year. That's the second opportunity. Third opportunity, the supply chain for a hospital. So hospital supplies make up about 15 to 20%, whether that's drug supply, surgical supplies, etc. 15 to 20% of a hospital's overall expenses. Now, it's incredibly balkanized because the physicians show favoritism to specific vendors, which if you watch my previous video on physician and distributors, sometimes the physicians have partial or complete ownership of those vendors.

So they're remunerating themselves through this disparate supply chain relationship that overcharges for, or upcharges for various supplies. Okay, that can be streamlined. That can be streamlined. And fourth and final is, there is a high degree of variation in the way patients are cared for, where per this article, there is a two to three times difference in the amount of money it takes to treat a controlled patient, in other words, a patient with the same degree of illness, etc., etc., across different doctors within the same hospital.

So whether it be like heart failure or diabetes or an infection, etc., there's a huge degree of variation by doctor. And so that is where that can be addressed through standardized protocols, whether they be physician protocols or nursing protocols. We use a ton of protocols at Hopkins. They were great. They were designed by the physicians. They were awesome. Oh, by the way, Geisinger at Intermountain Healthcare, they use a large degree of protocols. It's not bad cookbook medicine. There are clinically justified reasons to go off the protocol.

But the point is that you start with the protocol, and then you make the conscious decision to go off of it. You don't start in this nebulous, a protocol world. Okay, so the point is, is that we, and oh, by the way, there's an expression for this in healthcare. It's called feeding the beast. Okay, feeding a large healthcare system. We all know we need to stop feeding the beast. And here are some viable alternatives that we can do instead. And thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

