Title: 4 Types of Surprise Medical Bills_ut27YH4pBNU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ut27YH4pBNU
Language: en
Duration: 5:11
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is four types of surprise medical bills. Now many of us hear about surprise medical bills in the news all the time. And there's even information about potential government legislation about surprise medical bills. But surprise medical bills are not one thing. There's actually at least four types of surprise medical bills and even more. But let's at least go over these four. And they're in descending order of most complicated to least complicated.

Okay, first off, our OWN, which stands for out of network. Out of network surprise bills are a surprise or unexpected for a combination of three reasons. One, there is a different deductible in your commercial health insurance plan from in-network bills. So yes, your insurance plan doesn't have one deductible. It has two deductibles. It has all your expenses for your in-network deductible. And then any out of network expenses that you have start over with a completely different deductible. So in other words, if you met your in-network deductible, but then you have an out of network bill, it goes towards your out of network deductible, which is at zero at that point.

In other words, you have to pay all the money out of your own pocket start. Okay, so that could be like an additional thousand dollar out of network deductible. Number two, different coinsurance from in-network. So typically in-network coinsurance is like, you would have to pay 20% out of your own pocket. And the insurance company would pay 80%. And typically, for out of network coinsurance, it's less. In other words, the insurance company will only pay 60% and you the individual would have to pay 40%. That's on top of the separate out of network deductible.

And then third and final, there is no discount off of billed charges because they're out of network by definition. If they bill $5,000, then you and the insurance company together have to pay $5,000. There's no PPO discount. Let's go through a specific example. Okay, for endoscopy. So this could be an upper endoscopy looking at the stomach and esophagus or for a colonoscopy. Typically done by a gastroenterologist where the out of network, just the facility charge, okay, just for the endoscopy center or hospital where it's done could be $5,000.

You have an out of network deductible of $1,000. You end up having to pay 40% of the remaining $4,000, which is $1,600. So you add the two together and you have a quote, quote, surprise medical bill of $2,600. Now, the next type of surprise medical bill is a denial based on what's referred to as medical policy. So this is where a person goes in for a procedure. It is in network, doctor in network facility, and then the insurance denies it and says it's not covered. Now, let me give you a specific example of that.

At Compass, we had a person go into an ophthalmologist office for a specific laser retinal procedure for a specific diagnosis. And it was denied based on medical policy because using a laser for that particular diagnosis was not allowed for the medical policy. You could use the laser for other types of eye diagnoses. You could treat the diagnosis that the person had with things other than a laser, like maybe a scalpel. But you couldn't have that diagnosis and that treatment with the laser. So it was denied.

That's a surprise. Next up, denial based on non-covered service. Okay, so in your insurance policy, there is tons of fine print that just says, like, what is not covered? Okay, so this happens all the time in, like, dermatologist's office where you might go in for, like, eczema or acne, which those might be, like, medical diagnoses. But they might do something cosmetic as well, or they might prescribe a cream that's cosmetic. And those cosmetic-related things are considered non-covered services. Again, they might do that at the same visit, so it's hard to tell, like, what's cosmetic and what's not cosmetic.

And so when you get a denial from the insurance company and you have to pay out of pocket, then that's a surprise. And then last but not least is not knowing your plan design. Okay? The basics around, okay, there are specialist copays and there are PCP copays, but then there's coinsurance for certain types of services like lab and x-ray and MRIs and hospitalizations. There are certain services that fall towards deductible. There are certain services that do not fall towards deductible. On the pharmacy side, it gets even more confusing because some tiered pharmacy benefits have, like, okay, well, you have to pay, for a tier two medication, you have to pay 20% of the medications cost up to a max of $40.

So for certain medications, you might pay 36, but if coinsurance ends up being, like, 42, you would only end up paying 40, all for tier two medications. Whoo! I'm drawing a sweat just thinking about it. Okay, so the point is, is that a surprise medical bill is not one thing. There's actually at least four types, and I wanted to make you aware of those today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z. Thank you..

