Title: 40_ Doctor Specialties Explained_ Master Class on How Physician Sub-Specialization Works_NipqL4zB24o
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NipqL4zB24o
Language: en
Duration: 38:32
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello this is Dr. Eric Bricker. I'm going super casual today without the tie. We're going to begin our session now about the doctor specialties because there's so many of them. We're going to go over all the ologists and it's super confusing but bear with me because it's super important. If we work in healthcare we have to know all the doctor specialties. So I'm going to break them up into four big categories. Primary care physicians, internal medicine subspecialties, surgical subspecialties, other which is sort of a catch-all and then in order to understand all these specialties then we need to understand how physicians are trained.

So as many of you know after completing undergraduate then in order to become a doctor you have to go on to medical schools. Believe it or not there's actually two types of medical schools in America. There are allopathic medical schools which people might consider like normal medical schools whether it be like you know Harvard Medical School or John Hopkins or the University of Illinois or the University of Texas. You name it. Those would be all allopathic medical schools and when you graduate from an allopathic medical school then you get an MD after your name.

Now believe it or not there's like a whole another type of medical schools that are called osteopathic medical schools. There's not nearly as many. There's only about 14 of them nationwide and most people that go to osteopathic medical schools end up going into primary care specialties. Now you don't have to go into primary care but a lot of people that go to osteopathic medical school go into primary care. Now when you graduate from osteopathic medical school you don't get an MD after your name you get a DO after your name.

Now both MDs and DOs after they're done with medical school they're just doctors and believe it or not you can't even practice medicine. In order to practice medicine you actually have to complete a residency. So both MDs and DOs have to go on to complete a residency at an academic medical center like a major university hospital or actually a lot of community hospitals have residency programs as well. And that's where the physician chooses their specialty whether it be pediatrics or OBGYN or surgery orthopedics you name it right.

And so after you're done with your residency which is anywhere from three to nine years so internal medicine which is what I am that's a three-year residency and then the longest residency is neurosurgery which is actually nine years long. And then after that you in order to practice you have to be licensed by the states you actually have to complete a residency in order to be licensed by the state. So in America licensing is not done at the federal level it's done at the state level. And then once you're licensed you can actually practice medicine.

Now beyond licensure each individual specialty like the American Board of Internal Medicine or the American Board of Pediatrics board certifies their own specialty so that you can be board certified in pediatrics or you can be board certified in OBGYN. Now board certification is just a private designation so you can practice medicine without being board certified but it's sort of an extra check the box to say that you know basically you have to take a really long like two-day test and for some specialties you even have to pass an oral board where you go up and forward from like a panel of doctors and you have to recite your knowledge and that's how you pass that board examination.

So after you are licensed and board certified you need to go on to practice in private practice etc or you can actually go on and then sub specialize beyond your specialty and that additional training is called a fellowship and a fellowship is an additional two to four years. So believe it or not the largest specialty in medicine is internal medicine but over half or about half of all doctors that become internal medicine physicians go on to sub specialize because there's a ton of sub specialties and one of the most common examples of that is cardiology.

If you want to be a cardiologist you actually have to do a residency in internal medicine first and then you do a fellowship in cardiology after that. Likewise with let's say gastroenterology being a stomach and intestines doctor you have to do internal medicine residency first and then you do a fellowship in gastroenterology to be a stomach and intestines doctor after that. So that is a broad overview and now we're going to go through each of these four categories. So thanks for watching. Welcome back. Okay this first part is going to be about primary care physicians.

So there are three main specialties that make up primary care or PCPs. Well first pediatrics doctors for kids. Two general internal medicine physicians which are general physicians for adults. So a lot of times for pediatricians once the child turns 18 or 19 sometimes they even hold on to until they're 20 and they say look I really can't see you anymore because you're not a kid anymore you're an adult. So if you need to see a general doctor or a primary care physician you need to see a general internal medicine physician.

There are some people that like seeing kids and they like seeing adults. They like seeing the whole family. So there's actually a specialty called family practice as well. So all three of these are considered primary care physicians and it's important because these are also considered primary care physicians from an insurance perspective. We talked previously about co-pays and so to see one of these three types of specialties it would be a primary care physician or a PCP co-pay typically around $25. Now a lot of women consider their OBGYN to be their primary care physician which is fine and a lot of OBGYNs consider themselves to be primary care physicians.

However one OBGYNs do not provide all of the same primary care services that these doctors do especially when it comes to screening. So the OBGYN might be helpful in terms of the screening mammograms but won't necessarily go through all of the other screenings from the US Preventive Services Task Force. And then point number two is that for insurance purposes OBGYNs are almost always considered specialists. So person, woman goes to her OBGYN and they say okay it's gonna be $50 copay. They're like but wait a minute I thought you were my primary care doctor.

My primary care co-pays are only $25. And for insurance purposes OBGYNs are almost always considered specialists and so people then have to pay their specialist copay. And that's what I wanted to share about primary care physicians. Thank you for watching. Hello and welcome back. Now we're going to begin to go over the internal medicine subspecialties. So remember a person can go into internal medicine for their residency and there and I was like okay internal medicine like what's the opposite of that is that like external medicine? So what internal medicine doctors do is they take care of all the organs on the inside of the torso but they're not surgeons.

So they treat all of the diseases and conditions that can be treated with typically with medications. With pills or IV medications etc. And some people are like okay well what are the different organs inside here? And there's different specialties that go along with each one of these organs. So there are we're gonna go through that now. So what's one of the organs that's in our torso is the heart. So cardiologists are heart doctors. So you finish your residency in internal medicine you can go on and do a fellowship and just focus on the heart and become a cardiologist.

So their big area of specialty is coronary artery disease which oftentimes will manifest itself as a heart attack. So people that are increased risk for heart attack or people who have had a heart attack because one of the biggest risk factors for having a heart attack is having already had a previous heart attack. So it's very possible to have multiple heart attacks over the years. So people that have had heart attacks in the past typically see a cardiologist to prevent them from having another heart attack in the future.

They also treat valvular disease. So you have four valves that go that go to the four that sort of connect the four chambers of your heart. So there's a right atrium and the right ventricle and the left atrium and the left ventricle and you have valves separating those. And if those valves don't open enough and they're too narrow that's called stenosis and if they open and they don't close all the way that's called insufficiency or regurgitation. So you can have aortic insufficiency or aortic regurgitation and so the cardiologist will use various medications to treat those valvular disease.

They'll diagnose valvular disease. You actually need a surgeon if you need an operation on your valve but they oftentimes will do the diagnosis for valvular disease. Likewise with arrhythmias. And arrhythmias is an abnormal heartbeat so your heart could beat too fast or it could be too slow. And so this is where doctors would use something like a pacemaker. The cardiologist would put a pacemaker in your heart to either make your heart beat faster if it was too slow or if your heart was beating too fast you can actually put in a little implantable defibrillator to kind of shock your heart automatically out of that fast rhythm without having to use the paddles and say clear and all that stuff.

Okay next up we have pulmonologists. Pulmonologists are lung doctors. Obviously previously talked about how like asthma and COPD are two big lung diseases that pulmonologists treat. Pulmonologists are actually also the ICU doctors because oftentimes people in the ICU need to be on a ventilator to help them breathe and so it's the pulmonologists that are really the ICU doctor experts as well. Interestingly pulmonologists are also the sleep experts. They treat a condition called sleep apnea which is one of the most common sleep disorders and apnea means to stop breathing.

So oftentimes when people have actually too much fat in their necks or just the way that their anatomy is structured in their neck that when they sleep at night their throat actually collapses and it actually causes them to stop breathing in their sleep for anywhere from 30 seconds to a minute to a minute and a half. And what happens is they do it literally dozens or even hundreds of times a night and it drops your oxygen level and it actually leads to depression, it leads to memory impairment, it leads to cognitive impairment, it also causes high cholesterol, it also causes hypertension.

So believe it or not you can actually cure all of those diseases if you treat the person's sleep apnea. And so they can do these things called sleep studies and then you can wear a special mask at night called CPAP to help treat your sleep apnea if you have that. Next up we have gastroenterologists or GI for short right because gastroenterologist is a mouthful right. Gastro means stomach, entero refers to the intestines and then ologist is obviously the study of. So gastroenterologists basically you know beginning in the mouth and the esophagus they're experts in heartburn which is also referred to as GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease.

They're also experts in stomach ulcers because believe it or not stomach ulcers are usually caused by an infection. So you can take antacids and antibiotics to actually cure you of your stomach ulcers. There are also experts in irritable bowel syndrome which is especially common especially in women. It's estimated that as many as a third of women actually have irritable bowel syndrome. There's also Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis which are autoimmune diseases of your intestines where your immune system is actually attacking your intestines instead of attacking a bacteria or virus it attacks your intestines.

So in rheumatoid arthritis you have your immune system attacking your joints. It's sort of the same type of disease except instead of attacking your joints it's attacking your digestive tract. And these two diseases combined Crohn's and ulcerative colitis are referred to as IBD or inflammatory bowel disease not to be confused with IBS which is irritable bowel syndrome. Now there are other organs that are associated with the digestive system and one of those is the liver. So gastroenterologists are actually liver experts as well.

Now gastroenterologists also do the screening colonoscopy so we talked about the US Preventive Service Task Force and needing to get a colonoscopy after the age of 45 or 50 every 10 years. Then it's typically going to be a gastroenterologist who the person is going to be referred to to have the colonoscopy performed. Likewise there's a similar procedure called an EGD which is an esophago gastro duodenoscopy. You understand why we just call it EGD for short. And there instead of the tube and the camera going through the rectum it is a tube and a camera that goes down through the mouth into the esophagus and the stomach and the very first part of the small intestine.

So that's a good thing for us. And if you are looking for things like ulcers or polyps or stomach cancer or evidence of heartburn erosion in the esophagus. Next up we have hematology and oncology. So here these two subspecialties are actually combined into one fellowship. So the vast majority of these doctors are board certified in both hematology and oncology. And these are the blood and cancer doctors. The reason they were put together is really the original cancers that were identified were actually blood cancers.

They were leukemia. And so that's why they originally put the two specialties together and they really never separated them. Now they're the cancer doctors but they're not the surgeons. They will not cut out a tumor. Instead these doctors are the chemotherapy experts. They're the ones that will administer the chemotherapy either through the IV or they actually have some pill chemotherapy now. And you would see a hematologist oncologist for the chemotherapy. It's very common for let's say breast cancer for a woman to actually have three different types of cancer doctors.

So she would have the hematologist oncologist for the chemo. She would have the surgical oncologist to surgically remove the tumor. And then she would have a radiation oncologist to administer the radiation therapy which is like super powerful x-rays to like zap the tumor. So depending upon the severity of the cancer a person might actually have three different types of cancer doctors. But the oncologist or the medical oncologist are just the ones that administer the chemotherapy. And finally for this board we'll go on to another board.

We've got endocrinology. Endocrinologists are the hormone and gland doctors. Really one of the most common glands and hormones that has dysfunction is the thyroid gland. You can either have hyperthyroidism where your thyroid is overactive and your thyroid gland controls your metabolism. And then you can have hypothyroidism where your thyroid gland isn't working enough. And then there's diabetes as we talked about before. Most diabetes is actually type 2 and most type 2 diabetes is actually treated by primary care physicians.

However if the type 2 diabetes is super severe or if the person has type 1 diabetes and they're on insulin then often times they'll see an endocrinologist for their diabetes. And lastly there are these glands called the adrenal glands. There's other glands too. There's your pituitary gland that's up in your brain. But your adrenal glands are about the size of an almond and they sit on top of both of your kidneys. And they secrete adrenaline. So the medical term for adrenaline is epinephrine. Like if you're on a roller coaster or watching a scary movie and your heart's racing and the hair's standing up on the back of your head and your palms are getting all sweaty.

That's the adrenaline or the epinephrine rushing through your blood. And it's the adrenal glands that secrete that hormone that cause that fight or flight response. So this is just some of the internal medicine subspecialties and we're going to go on to some more. Thank you for watching. Okay, welcome back. We've got three more internal medicine subspecialties to go over. Next up we have rheumatology. Now rheumatologists are experts in autoimmune diseases. So as I previously mentioned with the Crohn's and the ulcerative colitis, our body's immune systems can actually sort of incorrectly start attacking ourselves instead of attacking bacteria and viruses.

And when our body's own immune systems attack ourselves, then it causes inflammation and disease. And sort of the prototypical example of this is rheumatoid arthritis where people have pain and swelling, especially in their hands, especially in their knuckles. And it can be so severe that it cripples their hands and people are literally unable to use their hands anymore. Sometimes it's associated with a rash as well. It's called psoriasis. So when you have the arthritis in your hands and you have psoriasis at the same time, then it's referred to as psoriatic arthritis.

Now, there's another condition that you might have heard of as well. It's another autoimmune disease that's called lupus. And lupus is sort of a more generalized. It can literally affect your brain and your kidneys and your blood vessels. I mean, they can affect literally your entire body. And sometimes it's mild and sometimes it's so severe that people end up being unconscious in the ICU on the verge of death. So rheumatologists are the lupus doctors as well. And then there's sort of a very, a more common and somewhat mysterious condition that's called fibromyalgia that rheumatologists treat as well.

And it's not really clear what the underlying cause of fibromyalgia is, but it's characterized by sort of disseminated pain throughout the body. And having troubles with sleep as well. There's a variety of other symptoms that go along with it too. So the fibromyalgia doctors are rheumatologists. Okay, next up. We have infectious disease. Look, it's not an ologist. Infectious disease. Infectious disease doctors deal with all sorts of infections. Now, typically, let's say you have strep throat. You don't go to an infectious disease doctor, right? You just go to your primary care physician.

They might prescribe you some antibiotics and you're done, right? So typically, infectious disease doctors treat very severe or chronic diseases. And probably the most common, not the most common, but one of the prototypical examples of a chronic severe infection is HIV AIDS. So infectious disease doctors are the HIV AIDS doctors, which thankfully there's a lot of very good medications, anti retroviral medications to treat HIV. So people can live with it for years or decades without it advancing to AIDS.

But they'll also treat a lot of severe infections in the hospital. So infectious disease doctors do a lot of work in the hospital where you can have a very severe kidney infection. It's called pyelonephritis, or you can have a very severe skin infection. It's called cellulitis. You can have abscesses. So the infectious disease doctors are really the experts in antibiotics. But also, you can have an incredibly severe infection with fungus as well, especially people with diabetes sometimes get very severe fungal infections.

And then people who are immune compromised, because they've received a transplant or they're receiving chemotherapy from their cancer, their immune systems are compromised. And so they're prone to all these very odd and severe infections. And so the infectious disease doctors will help treat those as well, typically in the hospital. Okay. And then finally, we have allergy or allergists. Again, not an ologist, but allergists. But allergists, obviously they treat allergies. And again, the vast majority of people with allergies, they use over-the-counter medication, or maybe they use a prescription medication.

But they typically don't see an allergist. But really what allergists specialize in is one is they do the testing, right? Where they might have to do these small scratches on your back to determine what your specific allergies are. And then two, they give allergy shots. Sort of the fancy name for allergy shots is desensitization therapy, where they're giving very small amounts of the allergen underneath your skin. And what it does is it creates tolerance in your body slowly over time so that you don't have such a severe allergic reaction to it when it's in the environment.

So these are the final internal medicine subspecialties that I wanted to go over with you today. Thank you for watching. Hello, welcome back. We're now going to do the third area of doctor specialties, which is the surgical specialty. So again, after medical school, if someone wants to be a surgeon, then they do a residency in general surgery. It's four years. And after finishing a general surgery residency, then you can go out and be a general surgeon. And some of the surgical procedures that general surgeons do are hernia repairs.

And hernias can either be in the groin or around the belly button or just in the abdominal cavity. They also do gallbladder surgery. So it's very common for people to have gallstones. And the treatment for gallstones is actually to remove the entire gallbladder. So you can actually live just fine without your gallbladder. That procedure is called a laparoscopic cholecystectomy or lap chole for short. And they're also the infamous appendicitis. Ah, my appendus birth. I got, you know, horrible abdominal pain, throwing up high fever.

If you have appendicitis, it's going to be a general surgeon that's going to perform the operation to remove the infected appendix. Okay. Next, you have the cardiothoracic surgery. So like it sounds, they do the entire thoracic cavity. So the chest. And in the chest, the big things are the heart and the lungs. So they do the heart surgeries on the valve replacements. They also do the lung surgery. So if a person has lung cancer or has some other problem with their lungs, they'll actually have the cardiothoracic surgeons do the lung surgery.

They also do the cabbages, which are the coronary artery bypass graft. So if a person has blocked arteries in the heart, they could get a stent from a cardiologist. Or they could actually have a cabbage where they actually go in and they do a major operation to bypass the blocked arteries of the heart. Next up, we have vascular surgeons that they don't do the heart, but they do all the blood vessels. Their big thing is peripheral vascular disease where they will put in stents just like a cardiologist would, except they put them in the stents of the legs to increase blood flow when there is narrowing of the arteries in the legs.

They also do surgery on the aorta. People can have an aortic aneurysm, which is a bubbling or a ballooning of the aorta that they will then surgically repair. And they also do surgery on the carotids, which are the two arteries that go up to your neck. And obviously they're super important because that's the only way blood can get up to your brain. And so if people are at risk of a stroke or have even already had a stroke, that might be because their carotid arteries are partially blocked. And so they need to have a vascular surgeon do an operation on their carotids.

Okay, next up, you have trauma surgeons. Just like it sounds, it's for traumas. Now there's two types of traumas, two categories. There's penetrating and blunt. Penetrating trauma is either a gunshot wound or some sort of stabbing. And then blunt trauma would be like from a car accident where you might have, you know, ruptured your spleen or damaged your liver or some other sort of internal organ problem. Now nothing pierced you per se, but because of the blunt force of the car impact, it's a trauma surgeon that's going to see you for that.

Okay, next we have surgical oncologist. Again, these are the cancer doctors for actually surgically removing the tumors. Now there's overlap because all these other surgeons actually will operate on cancer as well, right? Because I already said that cardiothoracic surgeons will operate on lung cancer and remove tumors from the lungs, but surgical oncologists will do that as well. So they're actually like a turf war. They kind of fight over it. Likewise, general surgeons will oftentimes remove breast tumors, but surgical oncologists will also remove breast tumors as well.

Well, down here we've got colorectal surgeons. They remove the colon cancer and part of the colon, but surgical oncologists do that as well. So again, there's overlap and some of the turf war between the surgical oncologist and the other surgical specialties. Next we have pediatric surgery. So if you want to be a surgeon for kids, you do not become a pediatrician first and then become a surgeon second. You become a surgeon first. You do general surgery first and then you subspecialize and you do a fellowship just in surgery for kids.

Next up we have plastic and reconstructive surgery just as you can imagine. It's on the face, but then they also, they actually do a lot of surgery. They're experts on the hand as well. And then there's all sorts of other things like breast augmentation or liposuction, etc. that they are also experts in. Next we have endocrine surgeons and endocrine surgeons operate on glands. And the most common one similar to the endocrinologist is the thyroid gland if part or all of it needs to be removed. Again, if you have thyroid cancer, the endocrine surgeon could perform it or the surgical oncologist could perform it.

Okay. And then they also operate on the adrenal glands as well. You can actually have benign, so non-cancerous tumors on your adrenal glands and the endocrine surgeons will remove the adrenal gland tumor in that case. And then finally we have colorectal surgeons. So like I said, they're the experts not only on colon cancer but also on hemorrhoids as well, rectal prolapse, etc. So these are all of the surgical subspecialties. Thank you for watching. Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker back with the massive other category of doctor specialties.

So obviously there's a lot of other ologists and we're going to go through them now. So first up we have OBGYN. The OB stands for obstetrics and GYN stands for gynecology. So obstetrics which has to do with the prenatal care of the mom and then labor and delivery, the actual birth of the baby. Now OBGYNs actually do the sort of the well woman visits as well for doing the pelvic exams. However, they're also surgeons. So they will actually do the surgical removal of the uterus if that's necessary. And that's referred to as a hysterectomy.

And then actually having ovarian cysts unfortunately, I should say fortunately, they're typically not cancerous. But unfortunately they're fairly common. And so the OBGYN is actually the surgeon that removes the cyst from the ovary as well. They do a variety of other things as well. What's important to note for OBGYNs is that because of the way that a woman's hormones fluctuate during their pregnancy, the majority of babies are actually delivered at night. And so if you're an OBGYN, unfortunately you're going to be up overnight a lot.

And so what happens is a lot of older OBGYNs are like, I'm sick and tired of being up overnight all the time. So they only practice the gyne and not the OB anymore. So it's important to know that when a woman is trying to find an OBGYN that they actually, and if she's wanting to have children, that this OBGYN actually practices obstetrics and hasn't given up that side of the practice just to practice the gynecology alone. Next up, we have orthopedic surgeons. Now orthopedic surgeons is not a surgical subspecialty.

After medical school, you go straight into your orthopedic surgery or orthopedics residency. And they're obviously the bone and joint doctors. Their big surgical procedures are arthroscopic, although it's a minimally invasive surgery using a couple of scopes and small incisions into a joint like the knee or the shoulder. But then they also do the total joint replacements as well. Total knee, total hip. They're also experts in hand surgery. Again, so there's overlap because your hands obviously full of joints.

There's overlap between orthopedics or orthopedists that do hand and plastic surgeons. And then as I mentioned in a previous video, orthopedics also operate on the spine as well. Because obviously your spine has a bunch of bones in it. Now that takes us to the neurosurgeons, which obviously dealing with surgery, again, are not part of a surgical subspecialty. You don't become a surgeon first and then a neurosurgeon second. You go straight from medical school into neurosurgery residency, which again is nine years.

And obviously they'll operate on brain tumors or if there's bleeding in the brain, they'll be able to remove that blood that's swelling in the brain. But actually the most common thing that neurosurgeons work on is actually the spine as well. So there's much more spine pathology than there is brain pathology. So there's big overlap between orthopedic surgeons and neurosurgeons in terms of a turf war on who's going to operate on the spine. Okay. Next up. ENT, which is an acronym that stands for Ear, Nose, and Throat Doctors.

Because the official name of an ear, nose, and throat doctor is an otolaryngologist. So otolaryngologist. So otolaryngologist refers to the ear. Laryngo refers to the throat. Ologist is study of. They even left out nose, which would be rhino. So obviously otolaryngologist is a mouthful, so they just call it ENT for short. So they're the ones that actually put the tubes into little children's ears if they have frequent recurrent ear infections. So you would think, okay, well it's surgery on a kid, then it's a pediatric surgeon, right? It's like, no, it's not a pediatric surgeon.

It's actually an ENT that does that. They also do surgery on the vocal cords if there's vocal polyps. And there's also, if a person has a sinus problems or a deviated septum, then they'll do the sinus surgery or the deviated septum surgery. Next up we have urology. And urology, urology is actually surgeons as well. So they operate on the kidneys. So if you have kidney cancer, it's actually a urologist that's going to take that out. They also operate in the bladder. So if you have bladder cancer, then it's the urologist that's going to operate in that.

And there are other big areas, the prostate, for prostate cancer. Now, the number of prostate surgeries that are done in America has dropped way down because research has found that urologists were doing too many prostate surgeries. That prostate cancer is so slow growing that you can actually live with it for years or even decades. So a lot of men that were in their 70s and 80s with prostate cancer, it actually makes more sense to not operate on their prostate because they're going to die of something else before their prostate cancer ever bothers them.

So there's a lot less prostate surgeries that are done now than it used to be done. Okay, next up, neurologists, which are like the medical doctors just for the brain and the spinal cord. So they don't do surgery, but they're experts on seizures. So if you have a seizure disorder, which is referred to as epilepsy, then they're the epilepsy doctors. If you have multiple sclerosis, which actually is an autoimmune disease of the nervous system, then the neurologist will see you for that as well. There's another autoimmune disease of your nervous system called a Guillain-Barre, kind of an interesting name.

They're the experts in that disease as well. They're also the experts in dementia as well. Next up, you have anesthesiologists. Obviously, all these people that are going into the operating room need to be sedated, and it's the anesthesiologist that sedates them. Now, there's what's referred to as general anesthesia, and that's where you're so sedated that you actually can't breathe on your own anymore, and they actually have to hook you up to a ventilator while you're having the operation. This is for major operations in your thorax and your abdomen that they do this for.

But for much more minor procedures, there's a process called conscious sedation, where you don't need to be put on a breathing machine, and you're sort of put to sleep, but you can still actually breathe on your own. That's why it's referred to as conscious sedation. Sometimes it's referred to as MAC or monitored anesthesia care. So they're the ones that oftentimes will administer the MAC or the conscious sedation as well. And then finally, for this board, we've got more specialties coming on the next board.

But finally, for this board, we have emergency medicine, which are obviously the doctors that specialize in seeing and treating patients in the ER. Now, ER physicians typically do shift work. So typically, they might work like three or four 12-hour shifts, or maybe they're working eight-hour shifts. So they'll typically have their shift work in the ER, and then they'll go home. And then they might even work multiple ERs. Sometimes they'll even work urgent care centers as well. So thank you for watching, and we have more subspecialties to go.

Hello, and welcome back. This is the final portion of our session on physician specialties. And these are the final other physicians. So we have radiologists, which are the doctors that sit in dark rooms all day, and they're reading x-rays and CT scans and MRIs and PET scans and ultrasounds to see if there's any abnormality, etc. And most patients never see, never interact with radiologists. Next, you have psychiatrists. So psychiatrists, sort of mental health doctor, right? They treat depression, anxiety, but also things like bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.

Now, they're different from a psychologist or a therapist in that a psychiatrist is actually an MD or a DL, and they can actually prescribe medications where antidepressant medication, for example. Whereas a psychologist or a therapist cannot prescribe medication. Next up, we have a dermatologist. Of course, that's a skin doctor. Important thing for skin doctors, obviously, they treat acne and eczema. They do some cosmetic things as well, like Botox injections for wrinkles that are not covered by insurance.

One of the big things they do is they look for skin cancer, which the very sort of minimal type of skin cancers that are the most common types of skin cancer are called squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma. And they can remove those cancers right there in the office typically and send them to a pathologist to make sure that they're not any other type of cancer. And then that third type of skin cancer is the very serious one, which is, I don't even have it on here, which is melanoma. And melanoma is the one that is serious because it can metastasize and spread to other organs in your body like your brain or your lungs or your liver.

So, like I said, the dermatologist will take a biopsy. Now, surgeons will take biopsies as well. And those biopsies are then examined by a pathologist. So a pathologist just works in a lab. So again, radiologists don't see patients. Pathologists don't ever see patients, too. They just see parts of patients. And they'll look under the tissue, under a microscope. They'll use special stains. And it's really the pathologists that determine whether a tissue sample is cancer or non-cancer. You cannot tell from a CT or an MRI.

In order to make a definitive diagnosis of cancer, you actually have to inspect the tissue underneath the microscope. And it is the pathologists that do that. Next, you have radiation oncologists. I mentioned that before that if a person has cancer, oftentimes they might get three types of treatment. They might get chemotherapy. That's from the medical oncologist. They might have their tumor cut out. That's from the surgical oncologist. And then they might get radiation or zapping of the tumor. And that's by the radiation oncologist.

They use x-rays, but it's much, much more powerful x-rays than the x-rays that are used for taking pictures. Now, the big cancers that use radiation to treat them, not all the time, but sometimes, are breast cancer, prostate cancer, lung cancer, and colon cancer. Now, then there is what's called PM&R, which is physical medicine and rehab. That should be an R, PM&R. Now, another name for a PM&R doctor is a physiatrist. Now, don't get a physiatrist confused with a psychiatrist. They sound very similar, but they're totally different.

So, PM&R physiatrist doctors are experts in pain, but they're also experts in rehab as well. So, if a person, let's say they had a stroke, or if they were born with cerebral palsy, then it's really these PM&R doctors that are experts in taking care of a person when they need very intense rehab. So, they might work with a physical therapist. They might work with an occupational therapist. They might work with a speech therapist. And then it's overseen by the PM&R physiatrist physician. Okay. Now, you actually have specialties that have subspecialties underneath them, which I didn't even go over before.

And I'm not going to go over them here because it gets even more complicated. So, within OBGYN, there are sub... You can do an OBGYN residency, and then you can do a fellowship to subspecialize even after your OBGYN residency, such as in gynecologic oncology. So, if when you're a gynec, you perform surgery and you treat different types of female cancers, like breast cancer, ovarian cancer, uterine cancer, cervical cancer. Again, there's overlap. There's sort of a turf war between the general surgeons, the surgical oncologist, and the gynecologic oncologist, because each one of them kind of can do procedures and tumor removals in these particular areas.

Okay. Next, you have, within OBGYN, you have what's called maternal fetal medicine, or MFM for short. And that is a doctor that specializes in pregnancy and delivery for high-risk pregnancies. Either high-risk to the mom or high-risk to the baby. Probably one of the most common causes of higher risk is diabetes in the mom. And diabetes is dangerous because it can actually cause the baby to be too big and cause delivery problems. And then also for moms that have a fetus or a baby that has not been developing as well in the uterus as it should.

So those are a couple of situations. Another condition would be if they're having a thyroid problem during their pregnancy or if they're having a hypertension problem during their pregnancy. That's referred to as preeclampsia. Okay. Next, you have reproductive endocrinology within OBGYN. And these are the IVF and the fertility doctors. Again, a lot of what they do is not covered by insurance, but you can help couples become pregnant if you want to be a reproductive endocrinology doctor. So endocrinology kind of sounds like, oh, they treat diabetes and thyroid disorders.

They do not do that. They are the reproductive doctors. Okay. Then within orthopedics, you also have subspecialties. So you can do an orthopedics residency and then go on to do a fellowship to subspecialize within orthopedics. It's kind of broken down by the parts of the body. So you can be a spine, orthospine subspecialist. You can be an ortho foot subspecialist. You can be an ortho hand subspecialist. You can focus on the knees and the hips, or you can focus on the arm and the shoulder as well. So there's subspecialties within orthopedics as well.

Next, we have hepatology, which is really an internal medicine subspecialty, but there's very few of them out there because these hepatologists are liver doctors. And they specifically work a lot with people that need liver transplants. So liver transplants are fairly uncommon, but there's a doctor that specifically takes care of people that need liver transplants, and those are hepatologists. Next, we have pain management or pain specialists, which is actually a subspecialty of anesthesia. So some anesthesiologists are like, I don't want to work in the OR putting people to sleep all the time.

I want to treat people with chronic pain. And so those chronic pain physicians are a subspecialty of anesthesiology. So, believe it or not, I've gone over like 80 plus different specialties and subspecialties, and I still haven't gone over them all. But this is the vast majority of them, and if we work in healthcare, we have to understand the huge complexities around physician specialization. And now you know. Thank you for watching..

