Title: 50_ of Medical Treatments Have Unknown Effectiveness_riWKsKg-yNs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=riWKsKg-yNs
Language: en
Duration: 7:37
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is 50% of medical treatments have unknown effectiveness. That question mark means unknown. Yes, it's true. So according to a British medical journal article from 2013, and the BMJ and the Lancet are like the two premier British European journals. I mean they're on par with like the Journal of the American Medical Association and the New England Journal of Medicine here. So even though they're not American, like this is still a highly reputable journal, okay.

And in a study from 2013, they looked at 3,000 treatments and they found that 35% of those treatments were actually found to be beneficial or likely to be beneficial. 7% it was kind of a wash. It was sort of an equal amount of benefit and harm. 5% of those treatments were like unlikely to be helpful. And then 3% of those treatments were ineffective or just downright harmful. So the vast majority of them, 50%, it was unknown. And these are active treatments. Treatments that are actively being used on patients. Okay.

It's not saying they're ineffective. It's not saying they're effective. It's like we don't know. Okay. So again, there was another study in the Mayo Clinic proceedings from 2013 that said that they looked at 10 years of journal articles from the New England Journal of Medicine. Again, one of the most prominent journals in the world. And they found that 40% of the time there was a reversal of a previous standard of care in sort of one of these review articles. Okay. So in 40% of those articles they ended up doing a reversal.

Okay. That seems awfully high. So let's look at other instances. Okay. So in other reviews, 46% had reversals. And in another review, 16% had reversals. Which means that, look, treatments. In other words, it's stuff that we're doing. Okay. And again, because half of it's like unknown. The point is, is that eventually when they study it more, they're like, oh, we were doing that treatment. But now, we just shouldn't do that anymore. Because we've done more study on it. And we found it doesn't do anything. Okay. Let's give some specific example.

So, stents, coronary stents for stable coronary artery disease. So these are people that, you know, they were able to walk and exercise, they weren't having any chest pain, but they would do a stress test on them, or they would do an angiogram on them, and they would see a narrowing of the arteries. And they'd be like, look, I, on the angiogram, I see a narrowing, so I'm just going to stent it. Okay. Even if the person wasn't having symptoms, they thought that that was the right thing to do. Turns out, not the right thing to do.

That's not the standard of care anymore. You treat them with medications, with pills now. Next up, estrogen. I'm sure many of the women watching this video remember this. Estrogen replacement for post-menopausal women. This came out in the early 2000s, where this was done to decrease cardiovascular risk. It was used to treat hot flashes, bunch of stuff. Turns out, it actually increased cardiovascular and stroke risk. So they, we don't give. I mean, we used to give estrogen like water to post-menopausal women. We don't do that anymore.

Okay. Next up, believe it or not, in the 80s and early 90s, they used to give bone marrow transplants for people with breast cancer. They used to irradiate their bodies and give them such strong chemo that it destroyed their bone marrow. And then they gave them a transplant of bone marrow, with the idea being that the cells from the new bone marrow would go out and attack the breast cancer. And there was no evidence for this. It was kind of a theory. And they did like additional studies, and they found it completely ineffective.

And guess what? We don't do bone marrow transplants for breast cancer anymore. Okay. So what is, what's the point of all this? Look, when a patient is in pain, when they are suffering, when they have fear, and they present to a doctor or a hospital, of course, there is incredible urgency and bias towards doing something. I mean, if something, it's, I'm not laughing because it's funny. I mean, if somebody is coming to you for help, what are you going to do? You're going to say, well, there's nothing that we can do.

The point is, like, of course you try to help them. Now, the point is, is that the medical community and researchers needs to have as much science and data as possible. And if we do things, we shouldn't just, and if they fall into that 50% unknown category, we shouldn't just accept them as, that's the way it is. We need to continue studying those things. And if we find data, we need to reverse what we do. Okay. These things were reversed. I guarantee you there are things that are happening now that need to be reversed.

And look, there are things in that 50% that are highly effective, that are effective, and it just needs to be studied better. Again, because it's unknown. Now, there is a cost, and the authors of this article say, look, there's a cost. Look, look, this is where a lot of the waste comes from. Okay. A lot of the stuff that's unknown, it doesn't work, it's waste. Two, it can jeopardize the patient. You do this stuff, and you can have what's called iatrogenesis, which means you actually harm the patient from a complication from the procedure.

So you put in some sort of like external device, or you have surgery, you use a medication, it's unknown. There could be a side effect or a secondary infection, etc. You could actually harm the person and cause some sort of additional pain or disability or suffering because of that intervention. That's iatrogenesis. And then finally, it decreases trust. Okay, so what is the, because it's like, okay, you said you were going to do this, and I believed you that it was going to work, and then it didn't work. Well, because of 50% of the time, like you don't really know.

Okay, so what is the pragmatic advice about this thing? I'm going to say two things. One, an individual person, including myself, look, I'm going to make these decisions in conjunction with a primary care physician. Okay, I myself cannot be rational if I'm in a state of pain, suffering, or fear. So you better believe I'm going to have a primary care physician who's going to like help me through this. I'm not going to do this on my own. Okay, my, no one in my family is going to do this on their own. I don't recommend that any of you should do this on your own.

Okay, like second of all, as it relates to COVID, like I don't see patients. So like, I'm not going to get vaccinated anytime soon. But if I saw patients, I totally would. And when my time comes up, if it comes up to get vaccinated, I absolutely will get vaccinated. And more importantly, Dr. Adam Sifu, who is the, the main author, the final author, sort of the boss author of this study from the University of Chicago, he himself has received the Coronavirus vaccine. More importantly, so here's the guy who wrote this study about reversals and he himself, because at the end of the day, it's, it's medical decision making is a, is a, is a effort in probabilities.

Is there a probability that it's going to work? And is that probability that it's going to work a higher probability than the probability of it's going to harm you? Okay, it's not black and white, it's not one or zero. The decision making is one of probabilities. And so like, as it pertains to that, I would be in favor of doing it. And as it pertains to other things, like that discussion about probabilities needs to be done with somebody who is not in pain and suffering, so that you talk about the probabilities for yourself.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

