Title: 7 Best Practices in Reference-Based Pricing Negotiation_gpm3vtKEf5U
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gpm3vtKEf5U
Language: en
Duration: 5:55
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is best practices in reference-based pricing negotiation and it's based on the well-known story of what Marilyn Bartlett did in the state of Montana and it's a well-known story. Many of you are probably familiar with it where Marilyn Bartlett went to the hospitals in the state of Montana and working for the state employees and said, hey, we're going to reimburse you a percent of Medicare and as a result of that she actually got the hospitals to agree with it and ended up saving the state $15 million on hospital services alone and then she saved another $5 million on prescriptions so they ended up saving $20 million and Marilyn Bartlett is this huge hero and she's been paraded across the country as she should be for this amazing accomplishment.

Now let's go into detail specifically as to what she did. Now, before she went into this activity, hospital reimbursement in the state of Montana for commercial insurance for the employees, for the state employees on the state employee health plan range from between 191% and 611% of Medicare. That's right. The state employee health plan was paying some hospitals six times what the hospital was getting from Medicare. Holy moly, that's a lot of money. Okay. Now, but after Marilyn did her magic of negotiating RBP or reference-based pricing, in other words, that the state employee health plan would pay the hospitals a percentage of Medicare, she got them down to 200 to 220% of Medicare.

Now, many employers are highly interested in reference-based pricing so let's get into the detail of how Marilyn Bartlett actually negotiated this. So she had two major categories of techniques. Category one, rational analysis. Makes sense, right? Where she said, okay, well let's look at the Medicare reimbursement to those hospitals and how much does it actually cover what it costs the hospitals to do their services? And she found out that it costs, not the Medicare reimbursement covers 92% of costs. So hospitals are constantly crying poor about under reimbursement by Medicare.

She said, okay, instead of crying poor, let's put a number on it. Okay, fine. You're underpaid. You're underpaid by 8%. Now, she did the same thing for Medicaid. And she said, look, for Medicaid, their reimbursement covers 97% of the hospital's cost to deliver services for Medicaid. So again, hospitals constantly cry poor about how much Medicaid under pays. So Marilyn Bartlett said, okay, fine. Let's put a number on that. Okay, Medicaid under pays you by 3%. And then we're like, yeah, but what about all the self-paying, the charity care that we provide? So Marilyn Bartlett said, okay, well, let's put, let's do an analysis and let's put a number on that.

And she determined that the state hospitals were providing 59 million in charity care. And that was offset by $56 million that the hospitals were receiving in tax benefits from the state. So it was almost equal. So Marilyn Bartlett did this analysis and said, Hey, look, it's pretty reasonable for us to give you 200 to 220% because you're actually getting paid, you know, decently from these other places. Okay, fine. However, that did not seal the deal. That did not win the negotiation. So she also did arm twisting.

Now, this is very interesting what she did. This is the most important part of the video. She threatened to publish the payment rates by commercial insurance to the hospitals. In other words, she was going to show how much more the hospitals were getting paid by the commercial insurance carriers. She was going to go public with it. She was going to make it transparent. The hospitals didn't want that to happen. Next up, she was going to publish the personal emails and cell phone numbers for the hospital board members, the hospital CEOs, and the hospital CFOs, their personal contact information.

Like that is almost amusing. Okay, next up, she got the state employee union involved and she had the union use some persuasion with the hospitals. I won't go into any more detail than that. Okay, so next up, and she did some more things too, but next up, she threatened to use non Montana hospitals. So she said, Look, if you don't agree to this deal, we're just going to ship people out of the state and we're going to cover their transportation for free. So we're going to take volume away from you. Okay, now here is the punchline of this video.

Well, there's a couple punchlines. So number one, guess where this article is? It's from the Hospital Financial Management Association, the HFMA. What is the HFMA? It's the trade association for hospital CFOs. In other words, the negotiation tactics that Marilyn Bartlett used in the state of Montana was published by the the hospital CFO trade association as a warning to other hospital CFOs to show them how the state employees were able to negotiate reference based pricing. And as we saw from the state of North Carolina, if you're a hospital, you do not want reference based pricing.

So this is actually a warning to hospital CFOs against employers that want to do this. Okay, interesting thing number two, it wasn't just the rational analysis that got the deal done for Marilyn Bartlett. It was arm twisting. So my only point is to employers and brokers and benefit consultants is that if you're really wanting to move in the direction of reference based pricing, to a certain extent, you have to have the will that Marilyn Bartlett had to do some arm twisting, to be like, hey, we're going to publish your email addresses and cell phones for the hospital boards and the hospital CEOs and the CFOs.

And if you are not willing to do that, then maybe you're not going to be successful in your reference based pricing negotiation. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Thank you..

