Title: 7 Costs of Healthcare Bureaucracy_KDh-ODmj5Js
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KDh-ODmj5Js
Language: en
Duration: 6:43
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker, and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is healthcare bureaucracy as a public health threat. Now, the Harvard Business Review goes on to discuss the seven costs of bureaucracy. So one is bloat, too many managers, administrators, and layers of management. And I'm going to specifically address this as it relates to healthcare. So a hospital example of that is 63% of hospital employees are non-clinical. They are non-patient facing. So in other words, they are not doctors or nurses or the medical technicians or the transport, you know, the people that are the techs in imaging, like running the MRIs, etc.

So like, not those people. So 63% are not those people, not providing any direct patient care. That's a lot of managers. That's a lot of administrators. That's a lot of layers. Okay, number two, friction. There's too much busy work that slows down decision making. Huh! It's exactly what prior authorization is. So that is, it is gobs of busy work. Next, insularity, which the Harvard Business Review means as too much time spent on internal issues. And I will tell you, if you talk to a doctor or nurse or another clinician that is involved in hospital meetings, the vast majority of the time, they will tell you that, quote unquote, nothing gets done in the meetings.

Okay. I just had a friend of mine who's a doctor in suburban Chicago text me about this like last week. He's like, he's like, I'm shocked how nothing gets done in these meetings. Absolutely nothing gets accomplished because there's so much discussion about internal stuff without any action. Okay. Then there's disempowerment, which they define as constraints on autonomy. Again, that's the exact definition of prior authorization is the physician is not autonomous to do what they want to do. And it's very disempowering.

Next up, we continue on with more of the seven. So, um, risk aversion, too many barriers to taking risks. Now the, um, provider hospital and physician holding on to fee for service is a fantastic example of risk aversion. They don't want to even take on risk. They don't want to take on any type of, uh, accountable payment or risk-based payment. They're like, look, I just want to be paid for like doing stuff, whether or not it actually works or improves the outcome or improves health, et cetera. Like I don't want to be paid for doing it.

And hospital systems and physicians are so, uh, risk averse to taking on that change in payment. Okay. Uh, number, number six cost of bureaucracy, inertia, too many impediments to proactive change, right? So we say, Hey, healthcare in America has highly variable quality. It has a ton of access issues. It's super expensive. It causes tremendous amounts of burnout in all the doctors and nurses and patient facing folks. So, okay. So arguably we would want to change it. Okay. Bureaucracies by definition, stop change. Okay.

So one classic example of that, I'm sure many of you are familiar here with the two air is human report from the Institute of medicine that talked about how 98 was about medical errors. And they said, look, 98,000 Americans a year die from medical errors. They don't die from cancer. They don't die from a heart attack. They die from an error in the implementation of testing and procedures, uh, and medications themselves. And the point here is that was published in the year 2000, 23 years ago. And I would argue many of the issues as described in the Tehera's human report, um, are still around 23 years.

So, uh, another example is that it takes 17 years to broadly adopt new evidence-based care. So like it has been in the medical literature, they have done randomized controlled trials. It has been studied obviously like multiple times and it's done in pockets. It might be done in an academic medical center, but for it to be the commonplace practice of evidence, but in other words, the science is telling us this is the right thing to do. It takes 17 years for that to happen because that's a change and the bureaucracy is abhorrent to the change.

Okay. And then lastly, number seven cost of bureaucracy is politics, too much energy devoted to gaining power and influence. So how is that done? And I can speak to this is specifically for physicians because I've just experienced it firsthand is that physician culture is also, um, highly, uh, deferential to superior. So if you're a resident, you're highly deferential to the attending. And if you're a younger attending, you're highly deferential to the more, uh, senior attendings. So basically you go along and that going along is rewarded, right? So if you're an academic physician, you're like an associate professor and an assistant professor before you become a full professor and, and full professors get tenure, right? That's what everybody's going for at an academic medical center.

And you will get full professorship if you go along. Okay. If you try to change things and cause trouble and speak up, it is highly unlikely that you're going to become full professor. You're just going to be, um, passed over. Okay. So the, the end result of these seven, and again, these are defined by the Harvard business review. Um, the end result of the seven costs of bureaucracy is like the opposite of what we're always trying to accomplish, right? You know, sort of the, the goal of achieving an objective of better health, longevity, decreased suffering is we want it better, faster, cheaper, right? It's not, it's not rocket science.

We just want it better, faster, cheaper. Well, shoot. Bureaucracy makes it worse, slower, and more expensive. So it's like the opposite. All right. Yeah..

