Title: 70 Percent of Doctors are Employed by Hospitals_ Private Equity Firms or Insurance Companies_KDZREt8GotI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KDZREt8GotI
Language: en
Duration: 6:09
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is 70% of doctors are owned. They are owned, which means it's essentially fee for service on steroids. So what am I talking about here? So there was a recent report in Becker's Hospital Review that showed that 50% of doctors are employed by hospital systems and 20% of doctors are employed by private equity firms or insurance companies. So you get 50% plus 20% and you get 70% of doctors are not independent. So conversely, only 30% of doctors are independent.

And that's a big change. So, and I'll leave a link to all these sources in the show notes, right? So we got 30% of doctors that are independent today. About 20 years ago in the year 2000, it was 57%. It was almost 60%. So we used to have more than half the doctors in America be independent 20 years ago. And now it's only 30% of doctors that are independent. That is a huge change. Now let's talk about some of those implications. So point number one, for those 50% of doctors that are employed by the hospital, look, the reason that the hospital does that is because they want to control the referrals of the doctors.

They want to control where they do the test. They want to control where they do the procedures and they want to control what specialists they're referring to, to make sure that it's a specialist within that hospital system. Now being employed by a hospital doesn't automatically mean nefarious behavior, but it does mean that there is financial incentive for the hospital to encourage the doctors to do as much as they can, to do as much service as they can at the hospital and within the hospital system because they're charged a fee for service.

That's why it's fee for service on steroids because the professional fee from the doctor, that's not where all the money is in healthcare. All the money in healthcare is in the facility fees for the hospitals. And so the hospitals make a lot more money, the more services that doctors order. That's what's called fee for service. So that's the motivation for hospitals to employ doctors. Now let's move on to the 20% of doctors that are employed by private equity firms. Now private equity firms are for profit organizations.

Like by definition, they have investors that typically have borrowed a whole bunch of debt in order to buy these physician practices. They got to pay interest on that debt and they are looking to make a profit. So billing revenue is the priority fee for service is the priority. That's why so many of these private equity groups take the physicians out of network because they could bill so much more. They could, you know, you could bill three, four, $5,000 for an ER physician visit. Just the doctor itself would be three or $4,000 because they're trying to make as much revenue as possible.

Now the waters are a little muddy, right? Because if the doctor is employed by an insurance company, they might have to flip opposite motivation, right? So actually the largest physician group in America is the Permanente physician group, part of Kaiser Permanente. So these doctors are actually owned by the Kaiser Permanente insurance company. So there their motivations are different, but just know that it's still an outside motivation. There's still an outside force impacting the doctors. Okay. Now let's look at specifically the specialty of primary care.

So for primary care physicians, 43% of internal medicine physicians are employed. And for family practice, it's even higher. 57% of family practice physicians are employed. In other words, not independent. So, you know, if you split the difference between the 43% and 57%, so about half of all primary care physicians in America are employed. Now, again, the hospital system wants to employ primary care physicians because what do primary care physicians do? They refer to specialists. Not only do they refer to specialists, they refer to specialists a lot more than they used to.

What do I mean by that? So back in 1999, 4.8% of primary care visits resulted in a referral to a specialist. Now, 10 years later in 2009, 9.3% of primary care visits resulted in a referral to a specialist. So it doubled in that 10 years. Now, in the most recent number from 2018, 18% of primary care visits resulted in a referral. In other words, almost one in five. So look at that. It essentially doubled again in the previous nine years. So it went from 4.8% to 9.3%, but that's 8%. That's a lot. 4.8% to like one in 20 to one in five is what it went to.

Well, why is that? Well, there's probably a lot of reasons. Probably one of the reasons is that you only get seven minutes with a primary care physician now. So they can't take care of everything. So they're like, oh, you got stomach issues? I'm going to refer you to GI. Oh, you got breathing issues? I'm going to refer you to pulmonary. Oh, you got sinus issues? I'm going to refer you to ENT. And so the hospital systems love that setup because then they're getting more referrals into their specialists that they can control from the primary care physicians.

And those specialists order more tests and more procedures, which then allows the hospital system to build more facility fees in fee for service. And that's why it's fee for service on steroids. Now, what's my point for today? My point is, is that large organizations, be they hospital systems or private equity firms or even insurance companies, have influence on the doctor's decisions. And this is the norm. Okay. It is 70% the norm because physicians are largely not independent anymore. The decisions that physicians make with their patients today are largely not independent.

And that's the point I wanted to make today. Thank you for watching Health Care to See..

