Title: _1 Rule for Healthcare Investing_3qEeL1sq2oE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3qEeL1sq2oE
Language: en
Duration: 8:30
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is rule number one of healthcare investing. So, the first rule in healthcare investing is we can only make money if the patient comes first. It's a very simple idea, but I think it's an idea that we can all aspire to with our investing. Let me talk through that a little bit. So, the best way for most healthcare companies and most healthcare investors to make money is to increase the prices of the goods and services that are being sold in healthcare.

Now, that boosts investor returns. And so, the best way to increase prices and boost investor returns is through pricing power. Well, healthcare is unique in terms of its pricing power because this is a healthcare finance channel. We have to draw supply and demand curves, right? So, anytime you draw a supply and demand curve, you've got price on the y-axis and quantity on the x-axis. Now, in healthcare, we have this unique situation in that the quote-unquote healthcare industry is really a whitewashed word to describe the pain, suffering, and death industry.

That's right. I'm not trying to be too morbid here on this video, but we really work not in the healthcare industry. We work in the pain, suffering, and death industry. So, if you're in pain, if you're suffering, like you can't breathe, or you're on the verge of death, your demand curve is what is called perfectly inelastic. It goes straight up and down, which means that like you as an individual or your family members would be willing to pay any price to alleviate your pain or like help you breathe. A person with emphysema once described it to me as somebody holding a pillow and smashing it down on your face.

And that's what it feels like to not be able to breathe. Well, shoot, that is incredibly unpleasant. So, you would be pretty much willing to pay anything to stop that from happening. Okay. Or like you want to live. All right. Makes sense. You want to see your kid's graduation. You want to see your grandchildren. Like you want to live. Okay, fine. Now, there's two parts though. There's the demand curve. It's inelastic, but then there's the supply curve and the supply curve is upward sloping. And what happens in healthcare in America is that look, the price is low if the supply curve is what's referred to as shifted out.

But if the supply curve is shifted in, then that causes the price to go up. Okay. So, what causes the supply curve to shift out? If there's more competition, what causes the supply curve to shift in? If there's less competition. So, here in America, we have low competition for a variety of reasons. We give patents to pharmaceutical companies that it's supposed to only be like 16, 17 years. They extend it to like almost double that. We only have three PBMs in America. We only have a handful of insurance carriers in America.

Like there's not, like in your town, you might only have one hospital or maybe two hospitals. Like there's not a lot of choices, right? So, when you have limited competition in the face of inelastic demand, you have super high prices. You have super awesome pricing power. You have amazing investor returns. Okay. However, this comes at the cost of obviously exorbitant costs for patients. I'm going to use cancer as an example of this, right? There's a lot of pain, suffering, and death in cancer, right? So, a cancer patient's out-of-pocket costs on average in America are $2,598 per month.

Keep in mind, this is for people with cancer who have insurance. $2,598 per month. Okay. For comparison, in Europe, if you have cancer, it's $609. In Australia, if you have cancer, it's $438. Now, the demand for the pain, suffering, and death in Europe and in Australia, like it's perfectly inelastic as well. I think people's desire to alleviate their pain, suffering, and death is the same in Europe and Australia as it is in America. So, it's not the inelastic demand curve that's different. It's the inward shift of the supply curve due to lack of competition that's the problem here in America.

Okay. So, what's the result of that? Right. So, we have oncology drug revenue because of these increased prices has gone from $53 billion to $104 billion. It has essentially doubled for the 10 years from 2010 to 2019. Okay. The average cost of a cancer medication in America is $150,000 per year. Okay. Now, but people, but of course, immediately, people try to defend that and say, but, but these are life-saving medications. Okay. The big secret is, is that the average increase in life expectancy from these cancer treatments is 2.9 to 3.7 months.

You are not curing this person's cancer. Okay. You are not allowing them to live for years or decades more. These drugs are extending life by 2.9 to 3.7 months. Now, that might be worth $150,000 to you. That's not for me to judge, but it is a completely false expectation to tell a patient that they're going to live for like 10 years when the average expectation for these medications is 2.9 to 3.7 months, right? We need to not take advantage of the hope of a person who is in incredible state of fear. Now, listen, sometimes patients want to do everything regardless of what the doctor says.

It's a complex issue, but the point is, is that it's an exorbitant amount of money for 2.9 to 3.7 months. Okay. That's just the numbers. That's the way it is. I'll leave the sources in the show notes. Okay. So fine. What does that mean for people with cancer? 51% of people with cancer have medical debt. 53% of those medical debt go into collections and over a quarter, 28% of those who have cancer and have insurance, they deplete their savings, right? And I've literally seen this happen. Oftentimes the person with cancer, like it tremendously affects their family members.

I mean, they're having to ask family for money. They're having to take out a second mortgage on their house or they're having to sell their house. I mean, typically their loved one, their spouse or what have you, they're willing to do anything to save this person, right? It's perfectly inelastic demand. Okay. So we have a situation here in America where we have the pain, suffering and death industry, where we have, and oh, by the way, like it's not just the pharmaceutical industry, right? So like, yes, the pharmaceutical industry creates these drugs for cancer.

They're hugely expensive, but hospitals make a ton of money on surgery and, and care and imaging for people with cancer as well. Likewise, the, the PBM divisions within insurance company, they make gobs of money off of cancer drugs. Okay. Doctors themselves make tons of money off of this. In fact, the private equity firms have actually consolidated over 700 oncology practices in America. So there's been huge consolidations. You got to understand that there are people at these private equity firms that are consolidating these physician practices.

There are people within insurance companies and PBMs. There are people within hospitals. There are people within pharmaceutical companies where all day long, they think about how to decrease competition. Okay. So this is like literally their job. What can we do to decrease competition so that we can maintain pricing power? So like when we choose to invest, we can invest however we want. It's a free country. Do we want to invest our money and we ourselves make money on the backs of pharmaceutical companies, publicly traded hospital companies, uh, insurance companies and their PBMs and publicly traded private equity firms that own physician practices? Do we ourselves want to make money on the backs of the pain, suffering and death industry? It's up for you to decide.

That's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

