Title: _16 Billion Spent on Advertising in Healthcare_y2H9__Y6hNE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y6hNE
Language: en
Duration: 5:53
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is advertising in healthcare. Now believe it or not, direct-to-consumer healthcare advertising in America totals $16 billion a year. Now, yeah, I was in 2018, most recent year I could find. So 55% of the advertising was on TV ads and 34% of the advertising was on internet ads, whether it be Facebook ads, banner ads, etc. So then in 2021, the research firm, I'll leave a link to it in the show notes, believes it's going to flip, okay? They'll think the TV ads are going to go down to 42% and that the internet ads are going to go up to 46%.

So the majority of ad spend is going to go from TV to internet, which is pretty similar to what we've seen in a lot of other areas, right? Because all the eyeballs are on the internet. Now, keep in mind that there are only two countries in the entire world where direct-to-consumer pharmaceutical advertising is legal. And those two countries are the United States and New Zealand. So we are unique when it comes to the world of healthcare, in many ways, but this is one of the ways. Okay, next up, I want to put this advertising spending in context of a Harris poll.

So Harris, the famous polling company, polled just over a thousand people, and they asked them a variety of questions about healthcare. But one of the questions they asked them was, okay, of healthcare organizations, which do you believe puts patients over profits? In other words, puts patients first over money. Only 9% of respondents said that pharmaceutical companies put patients first. Only 16% of people said insurance companies put people first ahead of money. only 23% of people said hospitals put patients over money.

And 36% of people said providers, doctors, nurses, therapists, etc., put patients over money. Okay, so healthcare providers are winning the battle of quote-unquote credibility. But they're losing the war. You've got to be kidding me. Only one-third of the respondents, a little over one-third of the respondents thought that doctors and nurses and therapists put them first over money. I mean, in my opinion, that's terrible. And that's the best there is. So the conclusion of this Harris poll, they themselves and Harris say, look, consumer skepticism is high in healthcare.

Consumer skepticism is high. Now, the final piece of context I want to put this in is that, look, overall healthcare ad spending is still going up. It's going up about 3.5% a year. Now, total ad spend across all industries is going up about 5% to 7%. So healthcare advertising spend is going up at a slower rate compared to the rest of advertising spend. But it's still going up. In other words, they're still dumping more than $16 billion a year now in advertising to customers that don't believe that they have them in their best interests.

So what does that mean? What do we conclude from this? Well, we've got a few things. So one, the entire movement by United Healthcare and Aetna CBS to become providers is going to be facing a major headwind when you have insurance companies about half as trustworthy as providers. And even then, it's super low at 16%. So that is a big problem that they're going to have to overcome. Okay. Implication number two, that essentially, the newer companies in healthcare are actually the most trustworthy. Because they don't have, they got a clean slate.

They don't have the extra baggage. Right? So if anything, if you've been around in healthcare, then you fall into these categories of like untrustworthy groups. So, and that's why you see success of new entrants into healthcare. Whether they be totally new companies like Teladoc, I mean, it has to provide a valuable service or product. I mean, it can't be junk. But the point is, the fact that they were new was not necessarily a hindrance. In fact, it might have even helped them because they had a clean slate from a reputational perspective.

I mean, Teladoc is essentially a provider. Right? It's a telephonic or, you know, you know, video conference based, you know, physician, etc. that you're seeing. Because they're essentially a provider. And they have a $16 billion market capitalization currently. Okay. Also, ChenMed talked about them before. Okay. So they're a bunch of doctors that take on Medicare Advantage risk for, you know, delivering primary care to people. Like, they're new. They're not St. Mary, St. Vincent, St. Joseph's. They're not blah, blah, blah, health system that's been around for forever.

They're new. And they're successful, growing up 35% a year. Okay. Amazon is moving into the healthcare space. They've got their own fitness device. Apple is moving into the healthcare space. They've got their own fitness device. Google bought Fitbit. They're moving into the healthcare space. So here you have these quote-unquote non-healthcare companies that are starting to move into the healthcare. Because from a reputational standpoint, they're actually ahead of the game. So this dynamic of high spend in a low trust environment is something that we all need to keep in mind in healthcare.

And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

