Title: _5.8 Billion Healthcare Startup Teaches About Patient Engagement_jhZfjnVhQA8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jhZfjnVhQA8
Language: en
Duration: 14:14
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is what a $5.8 billion healthcare startup can teach us about patient and employee engagement. So, this is the story about Hims & Hers, which is a direct-to-consumer telemedicine company. Now, full disclosure, I have no connection to Hims & Hers. I do not own any Hims & Hers stock. This is not financial advice. So, Hims & Hers, in the most recent quarter of 2024, made $402 million of revenue just for the quarter. They're on track to make $1.6 billion of revenue in a year.

Now, that quarterly revenue was up 77% from the year prior. And they're like, oh, well this is just some money-losing startup. Like, not at all. They're profitable. They made $51 million of profit off that $402 million of revenue. They have 2 million members. They provide telemedicine for 2 million people in America on a subscription. That 2 million members is up 44% from the previous year. So, in a sea of healthcare startups that have failed, Hims & Hers is a huge success. So, we got to look at what they're doing and learn from their success.

Now, if you run the math on the 2 million people and the $4 million over three months, that comes down to $67 per person per month that they're getting from those 2 million dollars of revenue. So, I'm like, ah, that's $67 per person per month. That's actually kind of close to what a direct primary care company clinic would charge. So, let's actually compare then what Hims & Hers are doing to both direct primary care and also employer-sponsored health plans and their point solutions. So, we can learn what they're doing to so fantastically engage their customers.

Okay. So, as I said, Hims & Hers is a direct-to-consumer telemedicine company. And it was founded by Andrew Dudham in 2017. Now, Andrew Dudham today is only 36, which means that when he started Hims & Hers, he was only 29. Now, he had helped in the very early days of a start-up that became hugely successful that was in the media business. And so, the key here is that Andrew Dudham is a healthcare outsider. He's not a healthcare guy. And it's that, but guess what he's really good at? He's really good at growing and scaling companies.

So, to a certain extent, I think it's helpful to have non-healthcare people start healthcare companies because it brings fresh perspective and a fresh set of eyes. And if anything, Andrew Dudham not being a healthcare person actually was a huge key to Hims & Hers' success. So, why is Hims & Hers been so successful? They give people what they want. Okay. So, here's where we get to patient engagement and member engagement. Okay. Well, what do people want? So, the very first thing that you need to know about Hims & Hers is that there's Hims and there's Hers.

There's two completely separate websites because what men want for their health and what women want for their health are different. And so, for men, it's telemedicine for, and it lists. As soon as you get on there, it tells you what Hims can do for men. For men, the A number one thing that it can help you with is sex. Number two is your hair. Number three is weight. Number four is skin. And number five is mental health. Now, it helps men with their sex through prescriptions for generic Viagra. For their hair, it's for minoxidil, which causes hair growth.

For weight, they have both compounded GLP-1s and then also the brand name GLP-1s. For skin, it's anti-aging prescription anti-wrinkle cream called tretinoin. And then for mental health, it's things for depression and anxiety, things like SSRIs, like Prozac and Zoloft and other classes of depression and anxiety medication. Okay, then there's hers for women. Now, the A number one thing for women is weight. So again, it's the GLP-1s for weight control. Number two is wellness. Note, for men, no wellness. For women, wellness.

Why? Because women have this overall desire for quote unquote wellness. For a guy, like, he didn't even know what that means, right? So look, look at the offering and the wording. It's like totally different for women versus men. And guess what? For wellness, it's actually supplements for this overall quote unquote sense of wellness. Who knew? Okay, next up. Hair, thicker hair, also minoxidil. Anxiety, also, notice, for men, it's labeled quote unquote mental health. For women, it's expressly labeled as anxiety.

Again, SSRIs, Prozac, Zoloft, etc. For skin, it's acne cream, it's anti-aging cream, but it's also prescription eyelash thickening medication, right? So their specific needs of women are different than, or interest for women is different than men. Okay, and then also the birth control as well. Now, they don't advertise the birth control at the top, but it's immediately listed as one of the online services that their telemedicine doctors can provide. Now, of note about Hims and Hers, they spend 45% of their revenue on marketing across 450 different media sites, whether it be web pages or TV channels.

So advertising, or what would be a kin, advertising for a direct primary care group, or akin to corporate communications for an employer-sponsored health plan. Look, it is a huge deal. It's not just their offerings for men. It's not just their offerings for women. It's the fact that marketing is a huge priority for the success of Hims and Hers. Next up, you don't use your insurance at all. So when they prescribe you these medications, you're just paying cash for them, and they give you the prices up front. And the prices that they give you are the prices that you actually pay.

You don't need to worry about, well, is it a co-pay? Is it co-insurance? Is it on the formulary? Is it not the formulary? Like, it doesn't matter, because you're just paying cash. Okay, and then you get free, discreet shipping. So no one's going to see at your home or your apartment complex what's being shipped to you, because it's not labeled. Okay, and then also, interestingly, they have lots of different price points by specific condition. And some conditions are as little as $15 a month, and other conditions are $115 a month.

And they do a lot of cross-selling, where you might start out with skin and then be like, okay, well, I have issues with erectile dysfunction or with mental health, and so I want to help with that too. Likewise for women. So they do a lot of cross-selling and upselling across the different specialties. Okay, now, what are the specific lessons that direct primary care and employer-sponsored health plans can learn from this success at Hims and Hers around patient engagement? Because they're engaging a lot of people.

They're engaging 2 million people. Okay, one, they have distinct product offerings for men versus women. So if you're a direct primary care clinic, like, this is what the men want. And if you're a direct primary care clinic, this is what the women want. And maybe you should have distinct messaging and distinct services for men versus women in your direct primary care clinic. Likewise, if you're an employer-sponsored health plan, and you've got various point solutions. Well, are there some point solutions that are of greater interest to men? Are there some point solutions that are greater interest to women? Like, you need to message specifically to each of the genders because their interests are different.

Their priorities are different. Okay, number two, there is a very large communications and marketing budget. So if you're doing direct primary care, like, if you're not seeing enough patients, like, improving your clinic is not what you should work on. If you have an extra hour in the day, you should spend that hour on marketing. If you have an extra dollar in your bank account, you should spend it on marketing. You need to do more messaging. You got to blast out on the megaphone about your clinic. More so, healthcare people love to, like, improve the mousetrap.

We love to make our, like, dude, like, at the end of the day, you just got, you got to get the word out. Okay, so that is a hugely important point. Likewise, for employer-sponsored health plans, you've got all these point solutions, and you're like, oh, utilization's too low. Listen, one of the smartest things I ever saw a director of Total Awards do is they hired, this is Yvonne Freeman at Michaels, who is now at Builders First Source. She hired a direct-to-consumer marketing agency to market her employee health plan to the employees.

It worked great. It was genius. If you're in employee benefits, guess what? You're in direct-to-consumer marketing. Like, whether you like it or not, you are in direct-to-consumer marketing. And so you need to use, one, you've got to make that marketing a priority, and two, you've got to use a lot of different channels. You don't just use email. You don't just use an app. You don't just use office signage. You don't just use mailers at home. You need to use a variety of channels and a variety of messages that are specifically segmented and targeted at the offerings of the individuals.

It's not rocket science, but it does need to have a direct-to-consumer marketing expertise. Okay, next up. Number three. It is a seamless experience at HIMS & HERS across, you get the telehealth visit, you get the prescription, and then you get fulfillment of the prescription by an online pharmacy, and it's mailed to you. So there's none of this, like, scavenger hunt. Okay, well first I've got to make an appointment at the doctor's office, and then I've got to get a prescription, and then I've got to go to the pharmacy and give them the prescription, and then I've got to go back to the pharmacy and pick up the prescription.

It's like it's one seamless experience where you use the internet and then the medication shows up at your door. Because people don't really want to quote unquote see a doctor, they want their problem solved, okay? That's what people want. People want their health problems solved. They don't want quote unquote the experience of seeing a doctor, right? So if you're a direct primary care clinic, maybe you need to accentuate your telehealth experience. Be like, well we have this awesome clinic that you can come into.

Well, maybe you don't want to come into your clinic. Like, it's great that you have that option available for various, you know, chief complaints or diagnoses, but for other situations, like, you want to leverage a fantastic, telemedicine experience at your direct primary care clinic. Likewise, if you are putting in a point solution, to what extent is that point solution? Is it not one seamless step? There's lots of point solutions that, again, are like totally like a scavenger hunt. It's like, okay, well like the vendor or the insurance company like contacts you, and then they got to contact the doctor's office, and then they got to change the prescription, or they got to move the referral to like some other place, and there's like all these steps you got to walk through.

To what extent does the point solution make it a seamless experience for the member? And I would argue that it's beholden on the vendor and the employer to make it easy. It's not up to the employee or the plan member to quote unquote comply with the scavenger hunt. That's not the point. The point is we need to make it easy for them, as we should. Okay, then finally, the price. It's priced by condition. If you're direct primary care, like you're like, okay, I'm going to charge $50 a month, $75 per month, $100 a month.

Like, not everybody wants to come in at that price point. Why don't you do condition specific lower price points so people can come in and see you for less, maybe for $15 a month, and maybe it's only for a certain condition. And then you can cross sell them and upsell them over time to more access to more services and more time at your clinic, right? So people love multiple price points. People don't like just one size fits all, right? I mean, like at Starbucks, you've got a gazillion different drinks that the barista can make, right? It's like people do not like one size fits all.

They want customization. They want customization of services and they want customization of price points. Like, let's mimic that, all right? You know, likewise, if you've got employee benefits or if you've got point solutions, are there certain point solutions that are going to be particularly of interest to certain population? And then you can cross sell them and upsell them. You're not really selling them anything with the employee, but you're basically selling the utilization of the program. So that if you have like a direct contracting program or you've got a diabetes program or you've got a musculoskeletal program, like maybe let's start out with that.

Maybe there's something on this list here that the people would rather start out with. And then over time, you can cross sell them and upsell them to the other types of point solutions that you have. And when I was looking at these four things, I'm like, huh? These perfectly align with the four P's of any successful business. The product, the price, the placement, and the promotion. So the product needs to be distinct for men versus women because their health needs are different. The price. There needs to be multiple price points, not just a price point.

The product, the price, the placement. The placement is incredibly easy via a seamless telemedicine mail delivery experience. The product, the price, the placement, and then the promotion. Don't forget you must promote this. And if you can learn, if we all can learn from him's or her and hers, I think we can have a much more successful direct primary care and employer sponsored health plan experience. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

