Title: _935 Billion of Waste in US Healthcare System_QuQrCqO79nY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QuQrCqO79nY
Language: en
Duration: 6:43
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching AHealthcareZ. Today's topic is waste in the US healthcare system. Now this was an article that just came out last week in the Journal of the American Medical Association. You can see here October 7th, 2019. And this is a highly quoted article and has made headlines in the news for the incredibly large amount of waste that is in the US healthcare system. So by their estimates there is between 760 up to 935 billion dollars of waste in the US healthcare system.

And this study was what's called a meta-analysis where they actually looked at dozens and dozens of studies and they studied the studies. And so the collective sort of wisdom from all those studies results in these numbers. Out of the entire 3 trillion dollar US healthcare system, so you're talking like a quarter to a third of spending is waste. And that's pretty consistent with previous estimates as well. Now they also said that interventions to reduce that waste could reduce about 282 billion out of the system.

So they're trying to be realistic. They're like saying, look, we can't take waste down to zero, but we can take 282 billion out, which is close to 10%, right? 300 billion would be 10%. So almost 10% could be taken out. That's incredibly significant. Oh, by the way, 935 billion, the amount of waste in the US healthcare system, that's larger than the entire economy of Saudi Arabia or Taiwan or Poland. So in other words, the US healthcare system wastes more money than the largest oil producer in the world or second largest oil producer in the world.

Okay, next up. It's interesting who this study is by. The lead author is Dr. William Schreit. He's the chief medical officer of Humana. And he used to be the chief medical officer for the health plan of UPMC, which is the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. If we work in healthcare, we have to know about UPMC because it is a gorilla, okay? It is a huge, and it is unique. It's like Inter-Onton Healthcare, and that in addition to owning multiple hospitals, it also runs a health plan. So within UPMC, they are absolutely concerned about being cost effective in care because they're taking in premium and they're delivering the care.

So the more cost effective that they are in delivering the care, the more they get to keep in the premium, just like Inter-Onton does. So it creates the quote unquote right incentives that we're looking for for high quality cost effective care. Okay, who else are authors on this study? Teresa Ragsad, who is a researcher with Humana. And Dr. Natasha Park, who is also from the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. Okay, isn't that interesting? That takes us to point number four, which is Humana. Now in the world of employee benefits, we almost never talk about Humana.

In terms of the major private insurance carriers, like frankly, Humana is a sort of way down the list in terms of importance, okay? And I'm not trying to be mean here to Humana. Now, that being said, Humana is a huge company and it's because the majority of what they do is actually Medicare Advantage. Now Medicare Advantage is unique where the government actually pays a set amount per Medicare beneficiary. Now it's based upon their age and comorbidities, etc., etc., so it's not the exact same amount for every single person.

But the point is that the business model of Humana is such that they're getting X amount of dollars from the government. So to the extent that they decrease healthcare costs for their members, they increase their profit margin. Okay? So in other words, the business model of Humana is aligned with lowering healthcare costs. Okay? And oh, by the way, they're number 56 on the Fortune 500. They're a $57 billion business. 20 years ago, they were like number 200 on the Fortune 500. So they're even growing relative to the other large, faster than the other large businesses in America.

And they need $1.7 billion of profit. So again, we hear about all the other carriers all the time, but they're not a major carrier in the employer space. There's some exceptions to that in Austin and San Antonio, in other words, Central Texas, in Kentucky itself because Humana is headquartered in Louisville, also somewhat in Wisconsin as well. So there are pockets where they're a player in the employer space, but in general, not so much. Okay. Now, I want to contrast Humana with the carriers that are big in the employer space.

And especially in the fully insured world, because of the 80% minimal loss ratio that was established by the Affordable Care Act, these carriers have to pay out 80% of their premiums in claims. So in other words, their business model is actually not like Humana's. That's a very important distinction. The vast majority of Humana's business model is set up to lower healthcare costs. Now, because of this minimal loss ratio, let's just run the numbers on an example. If you had an 100 employee company, they were fully insured.

It's about $10,000 per employee. So it's about a million dollars to cover all their employees. Okay. So with that minimum loss ratio, that means that $800,000 needs to be paid out in claims. And the insurance carrier gets to keep $200,000 for profit and administration. Okay. Great. Let's say we actually enacted the two, we just like, you know, snapped our fingers and we enacted the $282 billion of savings from decreased waste in healthcare. Let's say we just applied that to this particular group of 100 employees.

Okay. So that's about 10%. That means that their premiums would go down by 10% to $900,000, which means that claim spend going out would go down 10% to $720,000, which means the profit and administrative costs for the carrier would also go down by 10% from $200,000 to $180,000. In other words, for fully insured groups, for major employer carriers, there is a disincentive to lower healthcare costs. Notice Dr. William Shrank is the chief medical officer of Humana. I don't know if it's possible for the chief medical officer of these carriers to write this article in JAMA.

Like, I don't know if they'd be able to do that. Secondly, let's say the carriers actually did do this. They might be sued by their shareholders. Like, the company has a fiduciary responsibility to their shareholders. If the company started doing this, like, I think the shareholders might sue. Like, so they can't do this. Even if they wanted to, they can't. Okay. So what's my point for today? Is that when it comes to healthcare cost containment approaches and to organizations that are heavily aligned with that motivation because of their business model, we need to look at Humana.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

