Title: A Way to Fix Healthcare Fraud_phPwWziYbbU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=phPwWziYbbU
Language: en
Duration: 7:54
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is a way to catch healthcare fraud. So in a previous A Healthcare Z video, I talked about how catching fraud really needs to come first for employer sponsored health plans because that then gives the employer the credibility to then go to like the employees and to the doctors and hospitals that they work with to like have them change because the employer the employer's plan has already cleaned their side of the street by cleaning up the fraud.

Okay well that then begs the question where would you start in terms of cleaning up the fraud? Okay so this is A way. There are obviously multiple ways to clean up fraud but I'm gonna tell you A way. So what you're gonna do is you're gonna need to look at the paid claims with the provider ID. So you're probably gonna have to be self-funded in order to be able to get this information and you need to have the specific provider ID or the name. Okay so every UVO4 and HIPAA 1500 has to have the tax ID on it so you can actually get a claims file that says Hospital A, Dr.

X, the XYZ clinic or practice. You can actually get it by provider name. You likely will not get the allowed amount. In other words what the contracted negotiated rate is between the insurance carrier and that particular provider. And the reason for that is is because that's their quote-unquote proprietary contracted rate. So if they gave you both of those oftentimes they'll give you the allowed amount or they'll give you the provider. But they typically will not give you the they being the carrier. Well they will typically not give you both.

Okay so in this case okay just getting the data can be challenging but it's okay to just get like billed charges. Like we're okay with that. We don't need to have the allowed amount. All right next up we're going to analyze the high volume low dollar claims. And by low dollar I mean like billed charges of less than two thousand dollars. Okay but this high volume is super important. So we're going to look at the large number of small bills for both out of network. It'd be good to know out of network and in network.

Okay but it's not required. And the reason it would be helpful to know out of networked it versus in network has to do with how we then address the problem. Because fixing the out of network high volume claims versus the in network high volume claims that are potentially fraudulent. It's different. But let's move on. Okay so what you're going to do is you're going to sort that you're going to get like an Excel spreadsheet or database whatever and you're going to sort it by the number of claims by providers.

So in other words provider X has the most claims. Provider Y has the second most claims. And you keep going down by the number of claims. And what you're going to do is you're going to look for little known providers. So your employer might have a headquarters like in a major city and the major hospital system in that city might have the highest number of claims. Okay that kind of makes sense. However if you have a large number of claims from some sort of provider or physician office or practice or outpatient facility that like is not well known then that starts asking the question okay why do we have so many claims at a place that's kind of small.

Let me give you an example. So there might be one particular doctor like Dr. A and Dr. A might be a dermatologist or a cardiologist and he or she might have 800 claims within a calendar year and their bill charges is $550 per claim. Okay so if you multiply the 800 times the 550 that's almost half a million dollars of claims. So your company spend might be a million dollars or ten million dollars or a hundred million dollars. And so you're thinking okay well half a million dollars that's not that much. But I wrote this number 260 over here because that's the number of working days in a year.

So let's say this doctor's office was only open during business days. That means in order to have 800 claims within a year that three of your plan members need to be seen by this doctor every day. Okay that's a little odd. That should raise some eyebrows. Okay next up let's say instead of a particular doctor let's say it's a facility that has like multiple providers and that might be like a chiropractor or a physical therapist etc. And they might have 1100 claims. And oh by the way the bill charges like $780 per claim.

Okay if you do the math and the 1100 times the $780 per claim that's almost $900,000. So again maybe you know so like you oftentimes will look at your high very large claims so like half a million dollar claims, million dollar claims. Okay so these are obviously on a per claim level much smaller but when you add them up they're like the equivalent of a major ICU stay etc. Okay so you're gonna be looking at high volume low dollar threshold amounts. Now the fraud that might be occurring is that those providers might possibly be waiving the deductible coinsurance and copay.

And I'll leave a link in a show note that explains in detail why that's fraud. But in order to drive that type of patient volume to their particular offices or clinics they will likely have to drop the patient out of pocket cost to zero. Otherwise they wouldn't be able to get that many people from your plan to go and see them. Okay and you have a plan designed that for both in-network and out-of-network providers probably has some degree of out-of-pocket cost. So if those providers are waiving that out-of-pocket cost that is potentially fraud that you can stop.

Okay that then begs the question how would you stop that? What are the actions that you would take? First action is first you obviously want to alert the carrier because if they're in-network maybe they need to be dropped from the network. Okay next you would want to notify the State Department of Insurance again because this is potentially fraudulent activity so they need to look into it in themselves because they may be able to take action on it. However both these organizations the carrier and the state are so large and bureaucratic that it's reasonable to expect not much to come out of that in a short period of time.

It's gonna take a while to play out. What could you do in the near term? Okay one if your problem is related to out-of- network providers okay you can move to a POS plan a point of service plan right because there if the out-of-network provider bills the plan for services they'll be like well you're not a provider we've got a POS plan we're just not going to pay based upon that. Now there's a number of reasons why employers would maybe not necessarily want to move to a POS plan but it is certainly not viable options.

At Compass we worked with lots of major corporations that had to attract and retain very skilled employees and they had POS plans and that's a good way of addressing fraud. Next up if you don't want to move to a POS plan you could change your carrier to a TPA and the reason that you would want to do that is because TPAs tend to have much lower thresholds to examine the individual claims instead of automatically adjudicating them. So a lot of the major carriers will have sort of auto adjudication levels of like $10,000 a claim or $5,000 a claim or even $2,000 a claim and they process so many claims that they can't look at claims less than that because they just have too much.

You would like overload their system. However with a smaller TPA maybe we drop that down to $1,000 or $500 because on a per claim basis it's not a lot of money but when you add up 800 claims, 1,100 claims then it starts adding up and you'd be able to scrutinize each one of those claims potentially withhold payment or withhold future payments to that provider as a way of recourse. So now there are other ways you can solve this problem too. There are specific vendors out there that address fraud that might be good to hire.

I have no connection with them whatsoever. Now we could go on and on about other types of fraud but this is a type of fraud that you can actually do something about. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

