Title: Adult ADHD Impact on Health_nViaBjodWh4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nViaBjodWh4
Language: en
Duration: 8:54
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is adult ADHD and its hidden impact on health and employee health plans. Now, as many of you know, ADHD is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. And believe it or not, a lot of adults have ADHD. Now, oftentimes we think of it as a disease for kids, but 3-7% of children have ADHD. But in fact, 2-5% of adults have ADHD. And in fact, only about 20-35% of kids, quote-unquote, outgrow their ADHD by the time they're 30. So, for the majority of kids with ADHD, they continue to have ADHD as adults.

Now, it's a genetic disorder. There's a huge genetic component to ADHD. Okay, now, ADHD, according to a lot of the researchers and psychiatrists in ADHD, it's actually not a great name for the condition. It's a condition of decreased self-regulation, problems with self-control, problems with inattention, problems with impulsivity. They tend to have low conscientiousness. It's a hard word to say, low conscientiousness. Okay. What does that mean? They don't consider consequences. Now, interestingly, people with ADHD, both kids and adults, they know the consequences.

So, the part of their brain in charge of, like, memory and understanding and remembering consequences, they know what the consequences are. But the point is, is that their brains are wired in such a way that they're impulsive. They can't regulate. They can't connect the consequence that they know to then change their behavior. And it's a genetic disorder. I'm not criticizing them. I'm not blaming them. It's just a matter of fact. It's a nature of the condition. There is a two-to-one prevalence of men versus women. So, in other words, two-thirds of all adults with ADHD are men and about a third are women.

Now, here comes the impact on health. ADHD has a huge impact on adult health. In fact, people with ADHD have a decreased life expectancy of 12.7 years. People with ADHD live almost 13 years less than people who don't have ADHD. Okay, to put that into context, if you're a smoker or if you abuse alcohol, that only decreases your life expectancy by four years. In other words, ADHD decreases your life expectancy over three times more than smoking or alcohol abuse. So, here we have these huge public health initiatives around getting people to stop smoking and stop abusing alcohol when in fact, ADHD has a huge impact on people's lives.

Now, why is this? Why does ADHD have such an impact on life expectancy? One, because people with ADHD have poor diets. They tend to eat diets that are very high in fat and high in sugar and high in carbohydrates. As a result, people with ADHD have a two to three times higher rate of obesity. Because of their impulsivity and inability to self-regulate, they have a lot more accidents, especially motor vehicle accidents. It's actually much more common for someone with ADHD to have their driver's license revoked than somebody who doesn't have ADHD.

Okay, so as a result, they also have a three times higher risk of type 2 diabetes. They have a 30 to 40% increased risk of heart disease. And guess what? They abuse alcohol and they smoke with much greater frequency than the general population. So they engage in all of these unhealthy behaviors. Now, going along with that, there was a 2018 study of healthy behaviors for 120,000 people. And they actually identified five specific healthy behaviors. Five behaviors that had the greatest link to overall health and long life.

What are those five behaviors? One, you don't smoke. Two, you exercise 30 minutes every day. Three, you have a BMI less than 25. In other words, you're not overweight or obese. Four, you have no excess alcohol. You don't abuse alcohol. And then five, you have a diet that is low in fat, sugar, and red meat. And if you do all five, the people in this study who did all five of these things increased their life expectancy by 12 to 14 years. Now, what do people with ADHD do? They do the exact opposite of these five things.

So, what we have here is a genetic disorder, frankly, of judgment. And we used to see patients at the hospital all the time. And they would come into the ER and they would be hospitalized. And you would talk to them. And you just realized that they themselves were their own worst enemy. And I will tell you that when I worked in the hospital, like the number of patients I had who actually had diagnosed and treated ADHD as adults. Like, I could count on one hand. I guarantee you I had gobs of patients who had untreated and undiagnosed ADHD.

And so much of their poor judgment and their impulsivity and their lack of conscientiousness was due to a genetic disorder. Now, am I saying that like all poor judgment is due to ADHD? No, of course not. But the point is, there are some people who are, their brain chemistry is genetically, it genetically prohibits them from consistently having good judgment. And it has profound impacts on their health. And it's not all doom and gloom. There is a solution. Guess what? ADHD is highly diagnosable and it's highly treatable.

Now, it's diagnosed through a psychiatrist or psychologist or even primary care physicians can diagnose. And it's through this thing called the DSM-5 or the Diagnostic Statistical Manual 5. And there's various criteria through a conversation with the patient. If they meet these various criteria, then they're given a diagnosis of ADHD. Okay, so fine. Now, the treatment for ADHD, the mainstay of treatment that actually is effective, is actually medication. Through stimulant medications like Ritalin and dexamphetamine.

And so, and it's also a combination of cognitive behavioral therapy as well. But the key is, is that it is a chronic disease that is treatable. And you will never be able to change an adult in terms of their unhealthy behaviors until you treat their ADHD. You have to treat their ADHD first. And only 20% of adult ADHD is even diagnosed and treated. So, four out of five people with adult ADHD don't even know it. Not treated at all. So, if you run an employee health plan, the point is that employee health plans, of course, it stratifies with the 550.

Where 5% of your employees are driving 50% of your cost. And I guarantee you that within that population of 5% of people that are driving 50% of the cost, you have adults with ADHD. Now, you might say, okay, well it's not necessarily the employees, right? Because a lot of the people who have ADHD, they have a hard time keeping a job. They might be unemployed, but they might be spouses on the plan. You might have a female employee and it's their male spouse. You might have a male employee and it's the female spouse.

It might be the employee themselves. So, if you look at your high cost claimants and you see diagnoses consistent with self-destructive behavior, well then, actually, again, through on-site clinics, near-site clinic, direct primary care, and identifying these people who have ADHD and then actually making a diagnosis and getting them on a treatment plan. You're never going to treat these people while they're hospitalized. You don't make a diagnosis of ADHD in the hospital and then start treating them. That never happens.

It's done in the outpatient primary care and psychiatric setting. Like, this is a hugely unidentified opportunity for employee health plans to improve people's health by treating a disease that frankly impairs people's judgments. And that's the point I wanted to make today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

