Title: Advanced Practice Providers Explained... Nurse Practitioners_ Physicians Associates_ Plus More__98ty6X_gGIU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gGIU
Language: en
Duration: 12:14
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care. Today's topic is Advanced Practice Providers Explained. So now we're going to go through all of the different types of APPs, Advanced Practice Providers. Many of you are familiar with them as like nurse practitioners and physicians associates or physicians assistants. So we just got to understand how these folks are organized because there's like all these acronyms, right? There's all this jargon in healthcare. And so it's super important to understand how these folks are organized.

Now these types of clinicians are being used more and more in healthcare in addition to and alongside doctors, but they are not doctors. So here are people who are trained clinically to see patients, but they are not doctors. Now they can take histories. They can perform physical exams. They can order tests. They can order labs. They can prescribe medications. And they fall into a variety of categories and they're being used all over America. So if we work in healthcare, we have to understand what an advanced practice provider, an APP is.

So they first divide into two big categories. An advanced practice nurse, an APRN. So ABA is advanced. P is practice. And then RN is registered nurse. So an advanced practice nurse and a physician's associate. Now historically they used to be called physician's assistants, but they've changed their name to physician's associate. We're going to use the more modern term. We're going to use the more modern term. I don't want to offend anybody here. Okay. So then within advanced practice nursing, there are subcategories. And of course the subcategory that many of you are familiar with is the nurse practitioner.

The NP is sometimes abbreviated. Okay. Now, oftentimes you'll see after the nurse practitioner's name, they'll have some letters after their name, like FNPC. That is family nurse practitioners certified. So what they've done is they've already gotten a nursing degree, but then they've gone for additional training, either a master's of nursing in MSN or a doctor's of nurse practitioner, a DNP. And so typically a master's of nursing is an additional two years and a doctor of nurse practitioner is four years. Okay.

So they go anywhere from two to four years of additional training after becoming a nurse. And there are about 500 training programs and they could be like, you know, maybe a small school that you never heard of, or it could be like the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Like they've got a program. Okay. So there's over 500 programs that offer these degrees across the country and there's 385,000 nurse practitioners. And they've been growing at a rate of about 8% per year. So there's about a million doctors in America.

Well, shoot, there's almost 400,000 nurse practitioners. Now, 70% of those 385,000 nurse practitioners work in primary care. So when you think about non doctors who work in primary care, you want to think about nurse practitioners because there's gobs of nurse practitioners, right? There's close to 300,000 nurse practitioners that work in primary care in America. And in many places in America, like you're not seeing the doctor, you're seeing the nurse practitioner. Okay. Now, next up we have the certified RN against the registered nurse, the certified nurse anesthetist.

Okay. So these are nurses that actually administer anesthesia. They might actually insert the epidural for a woman when she is going into labor to provide anesthesia. They may provide the general anesthesia or what's referred to as MAC, the monitored anesthesia care or the conscious sedation for a procedure like a colonoscopy. Okay. There's only 53,000 of those. Okay. So there's a lot of CRNAs, but there's 53,000 of that, a lot less than nurse practitioners. Then there's a certified nurse midwife. Okay. So there's 14,000 of those.

So there's even fewer nurse midwives that assist with labor and delivery. And then there are clinical nurse specialists. Now, clinical nurse specialists, they oftentimes work in more administrative settings, but they can be clinicians too. They can do patient care as well. There's about 90,000 of those in America. Now, the, but by and large, the majority of what you're going to interact with in an outpatient setting is going to be an NP. And then if you do have to have, you know, surgery or in labor and delivery, then you might experience a CRNA or a certified nurse midwife.

Now, the whole other category of advanced practice providers, APPs is the physician's associate. Now, a physician's associate has an undergraduate degree, and then they go on to physician's associate school. And there are, and then, you know, after their name, they'll have like, you know, John Doe or Jane Doe, whatever their name is. And then it'll say PAC. They're physicians associate certified. So they won't have MD or DO after name. They'll have PAC after their name. So the, the things after their names, you're like, okay, is this a doctor? Is this not a doctor? You're going to look for those letters.

So if they're a doctor, it's going to say MD or DO. And then if they're a nurse practitioner, it's going to say FNPC. And then if they're a physician's associate, it's going to say PAC. Okay. So oftentimes like on their badges or on their white coat, it's like, okay, everybody's got a white coat. So what, what are you? Well, you can look at those letters after their names and this, now you would know what they are. Okay. So, and, and PA school is about three years. Sometimes it's 27 months. Sometimes it's 30 months.

Sometimes it's closer to 36 months, but it's about three years. And there are about 310 PA programs in America. And there are 148,000 physician associates in America. So notice it's less than half the number of nurse practitioners. Okay. So there's a lot of PAs, but not nearly as many as there are nurse practitioners. Now it's growing by about six and a half percent per year. So the rate of PA growth is about the same as the, as the 8% growth for nurse practitioners. Okay. So they're so sort of high mid single digits per year.

Now, interestingly, though, the specialties that physicians associates go into sort of the largest group is actually general surgery and surgical specialties, because a lot of physicians associates, they help out in the OR where a lot of times the surgeon will have what's called the first assist who might help with suturing, who might help with retracting, that's what the residents do in a lot of academic medical centers. But if you're in a community hospital, they don't have residents. And so they'll have like a physician's associate be like in the OR assist, like literally scrubbed in and like throwing in sutures or retracting or, you know, et cetera, helping out with the surgery.

They also help out a lot with the clinic visits. So sometimes when you go in for your pre-op visits, et cetera, et cetera, you're not seeing the surgeon at all. You're seeing their physician's associate. Or if you go for a post-op visit, you know, two weeks, four weeks post-op, see how you're doing. You might not be seen by the surgeon at all. You'd be seen by the physician's associate. So not only do they help out in the OR, but they help out in the outpatient setting both before and after the surgery as well.

Now, they don't only work in, and that could be like cardiothoracic surgery. It could be vascular surgery. It could be orthopedic surgery. There's many different types of surgery that they're involved in. Okay. But the second largest specialty that PAs go into after surgery is actually primary care. Okay. So you're talking 17% of PAs go into primary care. So you're talking, well, about probably about 25,000, about 25,000 PAs that are working in primary care. Again, not even close to the number of NPs, but if you're in an outpatient primary care setting, you might see the, or in an urgent care, you might see a PAC after the person's name.

It means they're a physician's associate. And then 11% of PAs work in the emergency room. Now, this is, again, a growing trend where there are many ERs that are decreasing the number of ER physicians, MDs and DOs, and they're replacing them with physician's associates. Because as you can imagine, the advanced practice providers, the APPs, they don't make as much money as an MD or a DO does. So a lot of times they're being substituted as like less expensive labor for seeing patients. And that's highly controversial because the training oftentimes involves about 2000 hours of sort of clinical time.

So 2000 hours is about a year, right? If you work 40 hours a week for a year, that's about 2000 hours. And they'll rotate through different specialties. So they'll do emergency medicine. They'll do surgery. They'll do ER, et cetera, right? Whereas a, they don't do a residency, right? That's one of the big differences is that all doctors have to do a residency in order to be a licensed physician. Like I can't, when I graduated from medical school, I could not get a medical license. I had to get, I had to do a residency in order to be licensed.

Which brings me to the final point, which is the growing independence of, because there's a shortage of physicians. Look, I'm not here to be like pro or anti APP. I mean, it's a highly controversial subject. I myself have had an APP and I've had a wonderful experience with a nurse practitioner. For me personally, when I was in medical school, my, like the student clinic provider was a, was a nurse practitioner and she was great. She totally helped me out. And then there's been other situations where I've encountered APPs like for my kids at an urgent care center.

And it was like less than an optimal experience. Okay. So just like doctors and there was good doctors and bad doctors, it's the same thing with APPs. There's good APPs and bad APPs. Now there is, because there's a shortage of doctors, like you've got a million doctors in America and there's like, there's not enough, right? We had a previous A Health Care Z video about how like the wait to see a physician can be upwards of like 150 days, right? Like, so it's like super hard to see a doctor because there's not enough of them.

So they're trying to expand the clinician workforce. And in some states, nurse practitioners can actually graduate from their nurse practitioner school. And they can get a, and listen, and APPs, they can bill Medicare and they can bill insurance. Okay. Now, sometimes they have to work underneath the supervision of a doctor, but sometimes they can be independent. In fact, in 28 states, nurse practitioners do not need to be under the supervision of a doctor. Now, in about 14 of those states, they have to be under the supervision of a doctor initially for a certain amount of time.

And then after that, then they can go off and be free and be independent. And in 14 other states, as soon as they get their FNPC certification, then they can go hang a shingle and see patients and have their own practice and bill and prescribe medications, et cetera, et cetera. And those 28 states, in other words, more than half the states in America have nurse practitioners that can be independent. And they range from Arizona in the Southwest to Connecticut in the Northeast to Iowa in the middle of America.

Okay. So it's like all over the place. Okay. Next, for Physicians Associates, it's much less so. There's only three states where Physicians Associates can, you know, hang a shingle and completely practice independently with no physician relationship or no physician supervision. And those three states are Utah, Wyoming, and North Dakota. And remember, all licensing of clinicians, whether it's doctors or nurse practitioners or physicians, associates, all of that is done at the state level. There is no national licensing.

So it's highly variable. So the amount of independence that NPs and PAs have across the country is highly variable. In some of the states, like I've mentioned here, it's highly independent. And in other states, it's much less independent. So it's sort of a patchwork of regulation across the country. But look, this is an, you have, if you work in healthcare, you have to understand advanced practice providers with advanced practice nurses and Physicians Associates. And then the subcategories of advanced practice nurses being nurse practitioners, certified nurse anesthetists, certified nurse midwives, and clinical nurse specialists.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

