Title: Age Drives Healthcare Costs... Learn Industries with Old Employees_ Age-Specific Benefits Strategies_UhhwlvBJRiU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UhhwlvBJRiU
Language: en
Duration: 13:16
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the number one way to lower employee health care costs, but it's probably illegal, but I'm going to show you the legal way to do it. Okay, so the number one predictor of health care costs for an individual and for an organization is age. Okay, so people who are under the age of 18, their average annual health care costs are $3,600 a year. People who are 19 to 44, their average annual health care costs are $4,400 a year.

Now look at this, as soon as people are 45 to 64, the average annual health care costs for an individual is $8,400. Look at that, it almost doubles between your 19 to 44 year olds and your 45 to 64 year olds. That's a huge increase. And then of course, the mother of all health care costs is for seniors. If you're over the age of 65, your average annual health care cost is $18,400. And shoot, there's still a lot of companies that have people over the age of 65 who are on their health plan. Okay, so age is the number one predictor of health care costs.

You can talk about all this stuff. You can talk about their social determinants of health. You can talk about different disease states like diabetes, etc, etc. But at the end of the day, we are all human. We are all subject to, um, or, you know, the wheels start to come off. Okay, so age is the number one predictor. All right. Now, by industry, certain industries have older employees. Other industries have younger employees. So let's look at it. This is a review. So the average age of an employee in America is 43. The industry with the highest average age is governments and municipalities.

The average age for governments and municipality employees is 46. For manufacturing employees, it's 44. For education, it's 44. For transportation, like trucking and airlines, it's 44. Okay, so those are the big four. Government, manufacturing, education, and transportation. You want to find industries and organizations that have high health care costs? Look to those four. Why? Because they have old employees. Okay. Converse to that. Average age of an employee at Facebook, 28. Guess what? I can guarantee you right now, Facebook, meta, whatever you want to call it, does not have an employee health care cost problem.

Next up, Microsoft, average 33. Again, I will tell you, Microsoft does not have an employee health care cost problem because their employees are just too young. Okay. Now, we can even see this in the most innovative employee health plans. Guess what? They're in the big four. The state of Indiana was one of the first to introduce consumer-driven health plans for all their employees. Why? They were a state. They had huge health problems. The state of New Jersey had incredibly progressive employee health problems. Again, municipality, super old.

John Tornis, the company that's all health care. They were a manufacturing company that makes dashboards for cars and trucks in Wisconsin. Old. Education. I just showed you a case study of Purdue University. Perfect example. Transportation. Believe me, I have never seen more astute CEOs as it relates to the employee health and health care than transportation CEOs. Okay. These CEOs and heads of benefits and HR people at trucking companies, they totally get it. They are super smart. Okay. And they're in places like Arkansas.

They're not like hotbeds of innovation like Boston and San Francisco. No. Hotbeds of innovation in health care are in Arkansas. Okay. Now, what does this come down to? Age is the number one issue as it relates to health care because of something called Occam's Razor. And Occam was this guy in Europe who lived during the Middle Ages, Renaissance period, etc. And he said, look, the simplest answer is typically the correct one. Of course, I think he said it in Latin. Okay. But another way of saying it is Occam's Razor is don't overcomplicate things.

So what do employee benefits and benefits consultants and brokers do? They look through all these reports, report, report, report, all these numbers. I mean, I was shocked at the amount of time and effort that was spent looking at reports. I'm going to say something controversial. Largely spend very little time on the reports. You can put them, you can file them in the circular file cabinet, otherwise known as the trash can. Right? What do you need to do? Just look at the employee age. All right? So now, how do we know that age is the, just fine.

Just, let's just say, forget about all the data. How do we know that age is the number one driver of healthcare? Raise your hand if you've ever been to a hospital before. Who, who, who's in hospitals? Old people. Look in the waiting room at a doctor's office. Like, who's in that waiting room? Old people. Go stand in line at a pharmacy or grocery store pharmacy, any pharmacy, right? Go between 4.30 and 5.30 p.m. because that's when the lines are longest. Look who's standing in line at the pharmacy. It's old people.

You'd be hard pressed to find a man in his 20s and 30s standing in line in a pharmacy or at a hospital. Hence, all the men in their 20s and 30s at Facebook and Microsoft, they don't, they don't use healthcare services. Almost at all. Okay? So, now, so of course, you can't discriminate against people because of their age. You can't fire them because of their age. You can't not hire them because of their age. That's age discrimination. And there's the AIDS Discrimination Employment Act. The ADEA of 1967, which says you cannot do that.

Of course you can't do that. Discriminating based on age is a bad idea. You should not do it. All right, now, but within every organization, you can use Occam's razor of age to dictate some of your strategic choices. For example, a lot of employers are like, well, we're not getting our claims data and we're not blah, blah, blah. Like, to a certain extent, like, forget it. In the meantime, you don't need it. Just look at your employees' age. Okay? And look at, maybe there's different job classifications that have different ages.

Maybe there's different worksite locations that have different ages. And like, you don't need to do some sort of fancy analysis. Just be like, look, where are the employees who are over 45? And where are the employees that are under 45? And it's the over 45 folks that are super expensive. And it's the under 45 folks that generally are not. All right, next. Open enrollment education. You educate all the employees. Okay. Where does it matter? Okay? Like, to a certain extent, like, educating your employees who are under the age of 44 about their benefits, like, not a big deal.

Because, like, they don't really use healthcare services, right? But you better believe you better educate the folks who are over 45. So, like, what's a specific example of that? So, like, I know companies that have older employees that, what do they do? They make sure that they educated their spouses where they had required recorded webinars that their spouses were required to watch. The spouse had to watch. Because what do older employees have? They have older spouses, by and large. Okay, next up. Vendor utilization.

The denominator in vendor utilization should not be like all the employees. It should not be like all the employees on the plan. Like, let's say you put in a diabetes solution. Let's say you put in a musculoskeletal solution. Who knows what solution you put in? The denominator should be the employees who are over the age of 45. Who cares if your men in their 20s and 30s aren't using the program? You've got an on-site clinic. We've got a problem. The men under the age of 45, the men in their 20s and 30s aren't using the on-site clinic.

Of course they're not using the on-site clinic. They're, like, men in their 20s and 30s do not use healthcare services. Okay? Fine. You want to look at the denominator needs to be folks over the age of 45 because those are the people that need it. Okay. Now, for just the vendor types, all right, let's flip the script. Let's say you are Facebook and Microsoft. Let's say you do have young employees. Are you going to put in a musculoskeletal solution? Are you going to put in a diabetes management solution? No. That's a stupid idea.

You know what is a good idea? Putting in programs for healthy moms, prenatal periods, for labor and delivery, and for healthy babies, right? Because that's the number one issue. Like, we at Compass had super young employees, and our number one issue around healthcare costs was around pregnancy and labor delivery and healthy babies. So focus on that. What's the number two issue for companies with young employees? It's mental health, largely in the form of substance abuse. Because if you have anxiety and depression, the vast majority of people who have those things, they self-medicate with alcohol and drugs, which leads to a downward spiral of health consequences and poor job performance, and it can ruin your life.

So that's why you see, like, mental health vendors, they get touted by all these, like, high-tech companies because that's their customer base, because those are the young employees who need this stuff. Okay? Now, so fine. Now, why? Why is age such a large issue, the number one issue when it comes to healthcare costs? It's because of our biology. It's because of literally the cells and the molecules in our bodies. That's why. What is that? Our bodies are capable of tremendous self-repair. Believe it or not, our bodies actually, we have cancerous cells in our body all the time.

I'm not trying to scare you. We have cancerous cells in our body all the time. If you go get a sunburn, guess what? You probably have cancerous cells after that sunburn. But our bodies have a tremendous repair mechanism where they can actually repair the damaged DNA in our cells from the UV radiation. Or if it can't repair it, the body literally tells the cell to kill itself because it might become cancerous. That's a process called apoptosis. So over time, that repair ability diminishes. Okay. Number two, our body is built with tons of redundancy.

So like a bridge is built to carry like 10 million pounds, even though it's only going to carry like 2 million pounds, right? So there's tons of redundancy in that bridge so that you don't even come close to hitting the weight limit. Well, the exact same things in our bodies, in our organs, like our kidneys and our livers. We have like 90% more kidney function than we actually need. And you can destroy like 90% of your kidneys completely asymptomatically without you ever knowing it because you have so much redundancy in your kidneys.

Likewise, with your liver, and you can have gobs of fat in your liver, and you can have diabetes, and you can have high cholesterol, and you can eat the worst diet humanly possible. And you can like be actively destroying your liver. And you'll never know because you can destroy huge percentages of your liver because your liver has so much redundancy. That's why they have live donors of livers. You can cut a person's liver in half and give it to another person. And the person who just lost half their liver is totally fine.

Likewise with kidneys, right? You get rid of half of your kidney capacity. You donate a kidney. You're totally fine because of all the redundancy that you have. Okay. So specifically, how does this relate to what you as an individual employee benefits professional can do? Whether you're an HR, or you're the CEO, or the CFO, or even if you're a broker benefits consultant, and it's called something crazy and brand spanking new and innovative. I'm being sarcastic here. It's called manage by walking around. Just look at people.

Okay. Now, management by walking around. Dude, don't look at reports. If you have an hour to spend, spend that hour walking around and looking at employees instead of reading reports. Okay. Hewlett Packard, David Packard at HP, invented the concept of manage by walking around. Okay. Now, I'm sure people did it before him, but he was the one who popularized it. And then it was further popularized by Tom Peters. Okay. So, I know the head of benefits for this huge national restaurant chain. She got on a plane and she went out and she visited all the service centers where they did distribution.

She went out and she visited the restaurant chain because the managers at these restaurants were in their 40s and 50s. They were the older folks. And she wanted to see the people in their 40s and 50s who were the managers who actually used the employee benefits plan. The CEO of a trucking company, I mean, she just said, look, you know, HR was talking to her and giving her all these stats. And she's like, look, I just look at our employees and they just look incredibly unhealthy. Because obviously at this trucking company, they had a huge problem with old employees who were obese.

She's like, just look at them. She doesn't need a report. She just used her own eyes, which are tremendous data gathering instruments. Okay. Finally, in this virtual world that we have today, we've got Zoom and teams meetings, blah, blah. What does that mean? What can you do today to manage by walking around? Turn the camera on. You turn the camera on yourself. You make sure that everybody else in the meeting has their camera on so that you can see each other. And you'll be amazed at what you can see in terms of employee age when you manage by walking around and then adjust your strategy and tactics accordingly.

Don't get sidetracked. Don't get confused. It's the age, stupid. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

