Title: AHealthcareZ Healthcare Finance Community Described_SaC9DT8nUwc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SaC9DT8nUwc
Language: en
Duration: 4:21
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Healthcare Finance Community. That's right, today I'm going to describe you, the A Healthcare Z viewers and the A Healthcare Z community that watches these healthcare finance videos because I am so incredibly thankful and appreciative for every single one of you and I want all of you to know who like each of you are. So, I started A Healthcare Z five years ago and I have made and many of you have watched upwards of 458 healthcare finance videos.

It's a little excessive but I'm not stopping. Okay, so on LinkedIn I have 42,631 followers. On YouTube I have 19,542 subscribers and then I have an email list of 4,131 folks. So, if you add all that up, that adds up to a community of 66,304 people. Now, there's probably some overlap there, so it's approximate. So, there's about 66,000 of you in this community. Now, obviously there's other watchers who are not, you know, followers or subscribers or whatever, but in terms of like the loyal followers, we'll peg it at 66,000.

Okay, now in terms of views, on LinkedIn in the last year, A Healthcare Z has had 6.7 million impressions. It's been shown up in people's feeds 6.7 million times for a total of about 2 million views. And on YouTube there's been about 7.8 million impressions that have resulted in about 610,000 views. So, all in all across LinkedIn and YouTube over the past year, there's been about 2.6 million views of A Healthcare Z videos. Okay, who are these people that are watching these videos? Who are you? Well, the organizations that they work for, the most common organization that people who watch my videos work for is, dun-dun-dun-dun, United Health Group.

By far and away, both United Health Insurance and Optum are the two largest watchers of A Healthcare Z videos. Number 2, CVS Aetna. Also, insurance brokerages like USI and Gallagher and Marsh McLennan Agency, MMA as well. So, there's lots of other organizations as well, but you can tell from the LinkedIn statistics who the top organizations are that are viewing the videos. So, there you have it. Now, it also gives a job description. So, who are you in terms of the jobs that you have? So, by far and away, it's people that are in sales, which I think is great because if we're going to bring change to healthcare, it's going to require a lot of salespeople.

So, I'm so thankful that we have so many salespeople watching these videos. Also, founders, people that are starting companies. Excellent. Executive directors, which is really like an executive at a non-profit organization. Strategists, business strategists. I'm not quite sure what a business strategist is, but we have a lot of business strategists who watch these videos as well. And then, nurses and physicians. I'm thankful for all of these groups of people and the many other people who have different vocations that are watching these videos as well.

Now, I will tell you on an individual level, I won't mention any names, but I can see specific people who repost my videos and have given me feedback, whether it be public feedback or direct messages. They are executives at CMS. I have people from the largest, most prominent universities in America who watch these videos and message me. I have some of the leadership of some of the largest charitable foundations in America who watch these videos and message me. I have a ton of international folks. So, after the United States, there's about like 6% of all my videos are watched by people in India.

So, there's a huge international following in the Middle East, in Asia, in Europe, in Latin America. There's a whole bunch of people in Brazil that watch these videos. So, I'm so thankful for the international community as well. And what does everybody in this community, what are we up to? We're up to improving healthcare for patients through a better understanding of the financing in healthcare. Because the status quo must go. And so, I'm just so thankful and appreciative to all of you here in the A Healthcare Z community.

And I just wanted to express that today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

