Title: Alternatives to GLP-1 Drugs for Employers_mX8lxRB5IqA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mX8lxRB5IqA
Language: en
Duration: 12:56
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is alternative to GLP-1 medications for employers. Now, this is sort of a sequel to a previous A Healthcare Z video that I made about the GLP-1 medications, which as many of you know, kind of the big four GLP-1 medications are Ozempic, Wegovi, Munjaro, and Zepbound. Now, there's other ones as well, but those are kind of the most well-known ones. And it is a super huge expense for employers in America. It is $9,000 to $10,000 per employee per year for each of these medications.

They all cost about the same. And it literally is so expensive that it might get to the point where employers will like wash their hands of providing health insurance at all because it is prohibitively expensive. I mean, only 1.7% of employees are on a GLP-1 today and it's already like almost 10% of the entire prescription budget for employer is on just these GLP-1 medications. And so really, as an alternative, listen, the way the GLP-1 medications work, and many of you already know this, is they cause you to eat less, including they cause you to eat less sugar.

And I'll post a link in the show notes to a previous A Health Care C video that I did in regards to a Dr. Robert Lustig from the University of California at San Francisco. He's like, look, at the end of the day, having obesity and having diabetes and having so many cardiovascular problems and having metabolic syndrome is essentially due to a sick liver. It's due to poor metabolic health. It's due to metabolic disease from a sick liver. And the A number one culprit of that is sugar. Sugar consumption in the United States per person is higher than any other country in the world.

We're number one. America is number one when it comes to sugar consumption. We consume 101 pounds of sugar per person per year, which is three to five times more than what is recommended. It's not 25% more. It's not 50% more. It's not even double. It is three to five times more than what is recommended. It's essentially a plague. It is a plague of sugar that is causing a plague of metabolic disease in America. Now, I had a patient once who smoked and she said to me, Dr. Bricker, do you know why I like to smoke? And I said, no.

Why? Tell me. Because it makes me feel good. And I'm like, that's a great answer. People like to eat sugar because it's sweet. It tastes good. It releases dopamine in our brains, which makes us feel good. It's highly addictive. So we crave and want more. So the alternative to like not eating sugar is not just to browbeat people around like, well, don't do this because it's bad for you. Don't do this because it's bad for you. It's also to offer them an alternative and a fantastic alternative to, and when I say sugar, what I mean is refined sugar, white sugar, brown sugar, high fructose corn syrup.

Sometimes it's referred to as added sugar. A fantastic alternative is fruit. Fruit is totally okay. The fructose that is in fruit is like when you eat the fruit, it is healthy. Okay. And we're going to talk about why. So eating fruit is an alternative. Believe it or not, increasing fruit consumption actually decreases the incidence of diabetes by 6%. And then if you add increased fruit consumption with increased vegetable consumption, it decreases your risk of a heart attack and retinopathy associated with diabetes.

So like eating more, if you're like diabetic, eating more fruit is not bad for you. If you're diabetic, eating more fruit is good for you. Now, currently we're, we're huge under consumers of fruit here in America. So only 12% of Americans actually receive their daily recommended allowance of fruit. Well, what is the daily recommended allowance of fruit? It's 2.5 servings. Okay. So only 12% of Americans are getting their 2.5 servings a day, right? Because you're supposed to get five servings of fruits and vegetables, right? So it's two and a half of fruit and two and a half of vegetables.

Well, what's, what's a serving? It's about the size of a tennis ball. Okay. So it might be like one banana or one apple or two of those little like cutie oranges or one like normal size orange, one pear. You get the point, right? So first of all, fruit is 80 to 90% water. Okay. So the vast majority of fruit is just water and fruit. This is why fruit is so healthy because of all the both soluble and insoluble fiber. So that when you eat the fruit and you taste the sweetness, the fiber actually helps prevent all of the fructose from actually getting absorbed into your digestive system.

So you just poop it out. So you still get the sweet taste without all the absorption because of the fiber, which is why eating the whole fruit and not just the fruit juice is so important because with the fruit juice, you're not getting the fiber. You got to eat the whole fruit to get the fiber. Don't even get me started about how little fiber Americans eat. It's way not enough. So part of the reason to eat fruit is not just the reason because it tastes sweet and it's an alternative to, to high fructose corn syrup and, and refined sugar, but also because it promotes the increased consumption of fiber, which is so important.

It makes you feel more full. Okay. Now I am not here today to tell you like, okay, fruit is going to solve the world's problems. Fruit is going to solve the diabetes problem in America. Fruit is going to solve the obesity problem. Like I am not trying to say that, but it totally helps. Okay. Now what, what is the, what is the current like state of affairs in terms of like physicians actually helping people to eat less sugar? Well, in the current fee, fee for service, primary care environment, they surveyed family practice doctors and they found that 90% of family practice doctors think that counseling patients about decreasing their sugar consumption is completely ineffective.

So like basically the majority of primary care doctors in America, like they, they think, they think that they're licked. They think that that it's, it's essentially, um, an exercise in futility to actually counsel people on, on eating less sugar. Okay. So the point is, is that just know, but we just need to have people go see their primary care doctor and that'll help them eat less sugar. The answer is no, they won't because 90% of primary care for doctors in a fee for service environment are like, wait, what are you going to do? Right? So that is not to say that primary care cannot assist with weight loss and decrease sugar consumption and increased food consumption and decreased diabetes and decreased cardiovascular disease and decreased metabolic disease.

It absolutely can. But of course, you know that it has to be primary care in a non fee for service environment. In other words, it has to be an onsite clinic, a near site clinic or direct primary care, because that allows for longer visits, that are free to the individual member that are hugely convenient. And of course I had to go to like the Bible of employee benefits, which is the book, the company called the company that solved healthcare by John Tornis that highlights what his company serigraph did to keep their healthcare costs flat for nine years.

Well, what did they do about, about nutrition? Nutrition and decreasing sugar consumption with their own employee population. They ran it through the onsite clinic that serigraph had with their nurse practitioner. The way that you deliver the alternative to GLP ones is through onsite near site or direct primary care providers. That's the alternative. Now, what did they do? They also had other clinicians as well. They had dietitians and they also had diabetes educators as well. So it was a team based approach.

Okay. Now they also measured their progress both at the individual level. So the individual clinician nurse practitioner would discuss the individual numbers and progress with each individual, uh, employee health plan member at serigraph. But then also they had de-identified dashboards so that the overall management could see how the numbers for hemoglobin A1C and blood pressure and weight, um, and other, um, uh, measurable factors associated with metabolic syndrome, how they would improve. And guess what happened? They totally improved and they did it.

So, so in other words, they did it. So, so these were the, the, the elements that were necessary for a successful program. They won. They did it through primary care. So, so they did it through primary care. That's non-fee for service. Two, they measured to improve, right? They got to measure their progress. Three, the incentive structure for their employees was a combination of one, the use of the primary care provider, the, the, the nurse practitioner, the dietician, uh, diabetes educator, et cetera, is free.

Zero out of pocket costs. They could use it as much as they want free, right? So then two, they had plan members sign up with their peers in groups. They volunteered to sign up into groups to help each other in their weight loss journey. Oh, by the way, that's actually the exact same approach that other companies like Noom uses as well. So the, the, the incentive from a peer group is also hugely important. And then finally, they didn't use money. They used additional paid time off as, because they asked the employees, well, what do you want? Do you want money? They even tried money.

They They tried 400 bucks, 400 bucks, 400 bucks didn't work, but you could earn an additional two days of PTO for completing or continuing to work with your, your, your nurse practitioner, dietician, uh, et cetera, et cetera. Okay. Now, interestingly, the university of Colorado also did a study around this where they're like, well, what if we did pay people to eat more fruits and vegetables? And guess what they found? They found that if they paid them $1 per serving per day, that they could get them to increase their fruits and vegetable consumption.

So like, okay, so maybe you're, maybe they were doing their goal of five for servings of fruits and vegetables per day. They would get an extra $5 per day. Now they compared if they paid them every day and they paid them through PayPal. So you, you ate your, your three servings, you got three bucks the next day. You ate your four servings, you got four bucks the next day. You ate your five servings, you got your five bucks the next day. Or if it was a lump sum at the end of the year, they tallied it all up and they gave you a big payout once a year versus no financial incentive at all.

And guess what? The only one that worked was when the people were paid daily. So in the case of Serigraph, they didn't use money at all. But in the case of the university of Colorado, they said, yeah, you can pay people to do it, but you have to pay them daily. Okay. So just know it's not just the amount that you pay them, but it is the, the direct, okay, there's a, there's an action and then there's a result. There's an action and then there's a result. And the action is you actually eat your fruits and vegetables.

And the result is you can pay the next day. It's not delayed. And so that type of reward mechanism was actually successful. So just know that, and I'm not here to get into some like argument about, you know, do wellness programs work? Do wellness programs not work? Listen, the point is, is that you've got these ridiculously expensive GLP one medications and people, listen, people like to eat sugar and they need to eat less of it. And there are ways that you can use a combination of sugar substitutes like fruit, and then also delivering a behavior modification through your onsite near cycling that actually works.

Okay. So I'm not here to say that we're going to like cure the world's ills with this approach, but here are some concrete things that can be done as an alternative. And I wanted to share those with you today. Thank you for watching a healthcare Z..

