Title: Amazon Primary Care Clinic Strategy - _Neighborhood Health Centers__vDJy85-_C9s
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C9s
Language: en
Duration: 6:48
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

So first up is the Amazon Neighborhood Health Centers. So Amazon has said look we're going to provide near-site clinics to our Amazon employees because they just don't have good access to primary care and that lack of access to good primary care is in large way what's driving our health care costs. So it's important to remember that you have the 80-20 rule right where 80% of the claims are generated by 20% of the employees. Well if you could get those 20% of the employees and identify them early and address their concerns early and potentially prevent a lot of these catastrophic things from happening whether it be a heart attacks or strokes or horrible cancer just because you screened them better or you know musculoskeletal issues that could have been addressed through other means whether it be through weight loss or active tissue release etc.

So Amazon's saying we're not going to use the local health care system to do that anymore we're going to provide ourselves with our own neighborhood health centers. Now everyone of course is familiar with HQ2 and how Amazon was going to have a separate headquarters outside of Seattle and they picked Northern Virginia. Whoop-de-doo. I'm here in Dallas Texas. We ourselves got the very first Amazon neighborhood health center. That's right it's coming to Dallas and that's where they're going to put it because our employer sponsored health care costs specifically in Dallas where they have a huge distribution center by DFW Airport.

Our health care costs in Dallas are incredibly high. So if Amazon was like well we're going to identify a place that has a lot of opportunity because the health care costs for our employees are so high then Dallas is a great place to start. Now these neighborhood health centers are going to be let me go to my notes here real quick. Okay first of all their primary care centers that also provide musculoskeletal care whether it be in the form of active tissue release or with physical therapy as well. They're also going to provide behavioral health as well.

They're also going to provide coaching as well. Behavioral health like psychiatry services, a counselor, some people call it mental health, behavioral health, psychiatry services, whatever you want to call it. That's going to be integrated into their primary care centers that they're going to initially start with one in Irving which is a suburb in between Dallas and Fort Worth but they're going to have a total of six locations around DFW. Okay so they're providing primary care. They're doing musculoskeletal which is a major source of cost for employers.

They're incorporating behavioral health. They're including coaching and health system navigation in this. Now the hours of this particular of these particular facilities are going to be Monday through Saturday. They're going to be open six days a week from 7 a.m. until 11 p.m. Because one of the major challenges for primary care is just access. And so if you have hourly Amazon employees that can either go before work or after work or on the weekends and they don't have to to worry about how they're going to fit it in with their shift work.

Well that is a I mean how many other primary care clinics have those types of hours. I mean that in and of itself is a huge quote-unquote value innovation. You're going to talk about precision medicine. Well just the timing of when the doctor can see the patient is a huge part of precision. Basically you're having the schedule of the clinic be precise. In other words it's so broad that it's precise to the needs of the employee and it's primary care. It's not urgent care. It's not emergency care. This is primary care.

I mean that in and of itself is worth its weight in gold. Now they are also going to provide telemedicine. So you say okay we can do a lot over telemedicine but maybe you have to come in once or twice or three times a year. But there's so much you can do for hypertension and diabetes where you can manage that chronically over the phone or with a video visit as well. Okay now the other thing that they are going now the services that are being delivered by the Amazon neighborhood health centers are not just willy-nilly chosen.

Okay they have been specifically designed and they've already been proven and they've already been proven by the Intermountain health system because what Intermountain did because the Intermountain runs its own health insurance companies. So they collect premium and they bear risk and so they know that by having what they call third generation patient-centered primary care that they're going to be able to better control their health care costs because they're on the hook for them. They're collecting premium.

Okay what is a third generation patient-centered medical home? Okay first generation is look we're going to have diabetes educators and nutritionists. We're going to have a team-based approach for chronic disease management okay nurse etc. We're not just going to have doctor, patient encounter and then we're done. We have to have a team-based approach for longitudinal management of the disease. Okay that's generation one. Generation two is the incorporation of the mental health professional in the clinic because if the person is depressed or has anxiety or some other mental illness that significantly impairs their ability to effectively manage their chronic disease.

So you have to add the mental health professional into that team. That's second generation. Third generation is then health system navigation because believe it or not scheduling the appointments getting the prior authorization fixing the bills on the back end all I mean that's what we did at Compass. That is so complicated and so cumbersome that you can potentially decrease the quality of care if you do not address the complexity of the health care system itself. And so Amazon's like hey you know I don't know if they talk to the Intermountain people or not but they're smart people they're like look um Intermountain has been highly successful with this they decreased their hot they decreased hospitalizations by 20 percent they decreased ER utilization and complex imaging like cts and mris but like 30 percent I mean this Intermountain model is proven it is not guesswork okay so Amazon's going to take that model and they're going to apply that to near-site clinics in DFW for their Amazon employees this is completely outside of a health insurance carrier plan and it's going to be like at like little to no cost for the employees so Amazon is taking this into their own hands they're not relying on a carrier solution for this and this is a value-based right value-based decision okay because it's not fee-for-service it's not fee-for-service those doctors are going to be paid a salary those nurse practitioners and peers are going to be paid based the salary it's not fee-for-service they're not going to be paid based upon how many encounters they see right they're going to be paid paid upon a salary and Amazon is on the hook because they're bearing the risk.

