Title: American Rescue Plan and Healthcare... The President Biden Stimulus Explained_aHLf2pXoZf0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aHLf2pXoZf0
Language: en
Duration: 11:28
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the American Rescue Plan and healthcare. Now the American Rescue Plan was just signed into law by President Biden on March 11th of 2021. It is far-reaching and it has many aspects to it, but we're only going to talk about the healthcare aspects of it today. And we're not even going to talk about all the healthcare aspects of it today, but we're going to talk about some of them. And the first area we're going to talk about is the premium tax credits.

So this goes to folks that are on the Affordable Care Exchanges. And previously, the amount of a subsidy that you could get was maxed out at 9.83% of your household income. Now that amount was lowered to 8.5%. Now, this does not happen for forever. It happens for 2021 and 2022. It's retroactive to January 1st of January 2020, but it's only for two years. Okay. So it's not for forever. Now, what that also means is that people will have a sort of max subsidy and not have to pay any premium at all if they are less than 150% of the federal poverty level.

Now, the information in terms of the updated subsidies and therefore the updated premiums that you're going to pay, it's not on the website yet, right? Because the law was just passed, but it's going to be, the plan is for it to be updated as of April 1st. Again, it's going to be retroactive to January 1 of 2021. And what is true before and is true now, this is based upon future projected income for 2021. So of course, nobody's guess is perfect. And if you've got a steady job and you're not getting a raise or you're not getting your salary decreased, what have you, then you might have a pretty good estimation.

But the point is, is that you, it's, it's an advanced premium tax credit. You get the subsidy in advance and then it gets, gets reconciled at the end of the year of 2021 for your 2021 taxes by January 15th of 2022. Okay. So it's future income. That's super important, right? Because nobody can estimate it perfectly. Okay. Now for all incomes, this 8.5% applies. So this is probably the biggest change in my opinion, specifically as it relates to premium tax credits. What does that mean? There is no longer a subsidy cliff at 400% of the federal poverty level.

So before, if you made more than 400% of the federal poverty level, you qualified for zero subsidy. You could still sign up for an ACA individual plan, but you wouldn't get any money from the government to help pay for the premium. So what does that mean in terms of actual dollars? Let's use an example. Okay. So for a family of four, then 400% of the federal poverty level, it's about $105,000. So let's say hypothetically, you have a family of four that's making $110,000 a year. They could still go and buy family insurance for that family of four.

They'd have to pay about $18,000 a year in premium. But because their premium is now capped out at 8.5% of that 110,000, now their premium is capped out at $9,350. In other words, they'd receive about $9,000 of subsidy that they were not eligible before. Again, for the next two years, for 2021 and 2022. So folks that might fall into that category would be a lot of sort of sole proprietors. So sort of like a solo architect or a solo accountant, where they always historically had to go out and they had to buy their own health insurance and their sole proprietorship.

I mean, they were doing pretty well. They're making over $110,000 a year, but they had to shell out 18. I mean, I had a neighbor across the street who fell into this exact category. He had an online business. And so now he's going to be able to only have to pay $9,300 for his family of four, as opposed to $18,000. So that's a pretty significant change. Okay. Now, the mechanics of it is people are going to need to re-enroll for a plan between April 1st and May 15th. So that's the special enrollment period that Biden also put in, that people can enroll between February 15th and May 15th.

Now, you can do a couple of things. You could re-enroll in this. If you're already in a plan, you can re-enroll in the same plan. You could, if you're not enrolled, you could enroll in a plan. Now you can enroll in a plan now, but you only have a few more days before April 1st. You can enroll in a plan now, but you just have to re-enroll in a couple of weeks to make sure that you're on the right kind of plan and the right kind of subsidy. Or you could actually then choose a richer plan, right? So if you're getting more subsidy, you might be like, well, I was on a branch plan.

Now I'm going to switch to a server plan. You can do that. Okay. So the mechanics of it is if you want the advanced premium tax credit, then you got to do it. You got to redo it or do it for the first time after April 1st. And then you got to do it before May 15th. Now you don't have to do that. If you're already on an Obamacare plan and you're like, okay, I'm going to get more subsidy now, but I'm just not going to do anything. Like you potentially will still get your money, but you're going to have to wait until your 2021 tax returns by April 15th of 2022.

And if you qualified for more subsidy, you get the money then. Okay. Now, whoo! Now the other group of people that this would really apply for, because a lot of people that sign up for ACA plans are between the ages of 50 and 64. It's almost like preschool for Medicare. And so a lot of these people don't have dependents anymore. So let's say that they were a single individual and they worked. And if they, so 400% of the federal poverty level for individual is $51,000 a year. So they might work for a company that like doesn't, has less than 15 employees.

They don't provide health insurance, or they might be a sole proprietor, a single accountant who makes more than $51,000 a year. So these folks will also get the, the no more subsidy cliff. So for families making more than 105,000 or for individuals making more than 51,000, then they're going to get a significantly, they're going to go from zero subsidy to actually a significant subsidy. So it's pretty big, significant change for them. Okay. Now, unemployment is another area. There's referred to as a special rule.

So for anyone who receives unemployment during 2021, they will be treated like they have an income of 133% of the federal poverty level and they will have to pay zero premium. They will get a full subsidy for their ACA Obamacare plan. Now that is important because the family glitch still applies to this unemployment sort of extra benefit. So what does that mean? Let's say you were working at a company and you were full time, but the company had less than 50 employees. You didn't get any health insurance to them, but you filed for, but you got laid off or what have you.

And you filed for unemployment, you qualified for unemployment, you started receiving unemployment. But let's say you had a spouse and that spouse got their insurance, gets their insurance through the job, or even has insurance offered, is eligible through that job. Then you do not qualify for this subsidy because of the family glitch. And the family glitch says, if you are eligible for employer sponsored insurance anywhere, i.e. you're unemployed, you don't qualify anymore, but you've got a spouse who is employed and they do qualify, then you don't get a subsidy.

And the reason that this was done with the original ACA was so that people would be encouraged to stay on their employer plan and they wouldn't jump off because they were eligible for a subsidy. So that family glitch holds true. It requires a change in the law in order for that family glitch to go away. I have created a whole nother video just on the family glitch. I will leave a link to it in the show notes if you would like to learn more. Now, the last point that we're going to go over is in regards to COBRA.

So the American Rescue Plan has changes for COBRA as well. It says that people who go on COBRA are eligible for a hundred percent of that COBRA premium to then be paid by the federal government, but only for April 1st through September 30th of 2021. It's only for six months of this year. So in that previous example, when I was talking about the person who, you know, lost their job, let's say they were laid off, but they were still eligible for, or maybe they were fired. They're still eligible for COBRA. Now, in that situation, you would actually potentially want to sign up for the COBRA for six months because the government was going to pay, is going to pay for all of your COBRA premium for that.

But again, it's only for six months. It's not for forever. So this COBRA piece is a temporary solution. And I think the implications on the employer side for the COBRA piece is potentially a mixed bag, right? So COBRA historically was a higher risk population because people that were actively using their health insurance were then subsequently motivated to pay the COBRA premiums. But the COBRA premiums were super expensive. And so even a lot of people who are actively using healthcare might not have paid their COBRA premiums because they just couldn't afford it.

And so now those high risk people who are generating a lot of claims, they have zero out of pocket costs now for the next six months. So you as an employer, you might have more risk in your COBRA population over the next six months as a result of this change from the American rescue plan. Now, the flip side of that is that if the person is like responsible and actually goes through the motions of signing up for COBRA and they just do it because they want to be responsible and have insurance either for themselves or for their family, but they don't really even use it, then they should sign up for COBRA too.

Because then you're going to get money from the federal government as a company to pay for their COBRA, but they're low risk. So they might not use the COBRA benefits at all during those six months. So if anything, you as an employer, you might want to really make sure that all your employees that are COBRA eligible sign up for COBRA because you're going to want that additional money from the government that pays for COBRA that is going to, you know, you're not going to be paying claims out for those people.

So that's a way to think about the COBRA benefits associated with the American rescue plan. So we got premium tax credits, we got the unemployment special rule, and we got COBRA. There's also things related to Medicaid expansion and CHIP that I won't go into today, but I'll also leave a link in the show notes. There's actually an excellent piece from CMS and an excellent piece in health affairs that this information is based off of. So I'll leave a link in the show notes if you'd like to read those. And that's my point for today.

Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

