Title: Ascension_ the Largest Non-Profit Hospital System in the US Explained_LyKeqqNWfd4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LyKeqqNWfd4
Language: en
Duration: 5:32
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Ascension, the largest nonprofit hospital system in the US. So if we're going to understand healthcare, then we have to understand Ascension. Now, Ascension has 151 hospitals. It is in 21 states, mostly in the Midwest and the South. It's headquartered in St. Louis, Missouri. It has 156,000 employees and it is the second largest hospital system in America after HCA, Hospital Corporation of America, because HCA is a for-profit hospital system and so Ascension is the largest nonprofit hospital system.

Now, it is a Catholic hospital system. It was formed by the sort of aggregation of several Catholic hospital systems between 1999 and 2012 and it even added additional Catholic health systems like ministry and some others even after 2012. So it grew after that. It has an executive team. You can go onto their website and you can see who their executive team is. It refers to a board, but I couldn't find any list of names of who their board members were. It's referred to as the Ascension sponsor. So that is an organization within the Catholic Church.

It's referred to as a public juridic person. Again, that's sort of a Catholic church term that they use for. It means it's its own separate entity. And that public juridic person of Ascension reports to the Holy See, which is the governing body of the Catholic Church. That's in the Vatican. So in terms of like the reporting structure, at least as I could find, that appears to be it. Now, I'm not making any judgments about anybody's religion. So I just want to make that perfectly clear as we go through the rest of this.

Now, Ascension makes about 6.6 billion dollars a year, excuse me, in the first quarter of 2021. So even though it's the beginning of 2021, they already posted their first sort of fiscal year quarter numbers. It was 6.6 billion for the quarter. So just multiply it by four, their annual revenue would be about 26 billion dollars a year. That would make them the 11th largest private company in America. It would make them the 115th largest publicly traded company in America by revenue. That would make it about the same size as Starbucks.

So, like, it's big. Like, it is a huge going concern. So we don't necessarily quote-unquote talk about it. You don't hear about it on CNBC. But, like, from a financial standpoint, it's hugely significant. Okay. So, most hospitals, I've talked about this in previous A Healthcare Z videos, most hospitals have about 40% of their revenue from Medicare, about 10% of their revenue from Medicaid. So if you add the 40% plus the 10%, it's about half their revenue, or about $13 billion a year of Ascension's revenue, comes from government programs.

So the largest source of Ascension's revenue is the government. Now, also, hospital revenue is about 40% commercial insurance, employer-sponsored insurance, and the final 10% is typically self-pay. Right? So if you take the 40% of the $26 billion a year, that means employers are paying Ascension about $10.5 billion a year. Okay. So that's a significant amount of money that Ascension brings in from the employer-sponsored plans in America. Now, so in terms of, like, okay, what sort of new, you know, this direction of value-based care, taking on risk, running a health plan, paid providers, if you will, where does Ascension sit in those terms? Well, they actually do, so they don't, they do offer a Medicare Advantage plan, so you can buy, it's called Ascension Complete Health Insurance.

Again, it's only for a Medicare Advantage. They don't offer any commercial plans or Obamacare plans or anything like that. Right? It's super small. I'd be shocked at how small it is. It has less than 5,000 members, and its largest state with members was Florida with, like, 1,200 members. In Michigan, it only has, like, 300 or 600 members. So we're talking, like, hundreds of members in each state or enrollees, if you will. So it's super small. And it's a joint venture with Centene. So Ascension doesn't even own the whole thing.

They co-own it with Centene, the huge Medicaid and Medicare Advantage company, and it was only started in 2018. So it's super new and it's super small. Okay? So, and then in terms of, like, ACOs, okay, well, Ascension has an ACO. It's called Ascension Care Management. Okay? But it's only in two states. Of the 21 states, it's only in Indiana and Tennessee. And it's not even in all the whole areas. It's only in parts. It's only in Indianapolis and Evansville. And it's only in Central Tennessee. So what's my point here at the end? As far as being, like, heavily reliant and, you know, sort of embedded with fee-for-service, like, Ascension seems to be, like, heavily focused.

Like, it's not like Geisinger or UPMC or Intermountain with these, like, you know, health plans and, you know, trying to take on risks and stuff. So, so here we have the largest nonprofit hospital system in America. It appears to be very much focused on fee-for-service. And if we work in healthcare, then we have to understand Ascension. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

