Title: Blue Cross Blue Shield Antitrust Settlement for _2.7 Billion_68mirD_aNTQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aNTQ
Language: en
Duration: 4:33
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Blue Cross Blue Shield Antitrust Settlement. So here we are at the end of September 2020 and many of you have already probably seen how the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association has come to a huge settlement with many of their customers who brought an antitrust suit against them. Their customers, Blue Cross' own customers, were accusing them of being a cartel. In other words, they were claiming that it was wrong, it was illegal because of the Sherman Antitrust Act.

It was anti-competitive for them to say that they would not compete across state lines, across regional areas with each other. As probably all of you well know, Blue Cross basically geographically divvies up the entire country and Blue Cross' plan in one state doesn't compete with Blue Cross' plan in another state. Now, this is a private case. This is the main point I want to make in this video, is that this case was not brought by the government. This is a Sherman Antitrust, potential Sherman Antitrust violation that is not brought by the DOJ, not brought by the Department of Justice.

It is brought by the customers of Blue Cross. Now, this case took seven years just to show you how slowly the wheels of justice grind up. Now, the settlement was $2.7 billion in monetary payments, but it also had an injunctive release or an injunction, which is a directed change of behavior as a result of that settlement. And what is that change of behavior? It's that the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association can no longer forbid competition of its members with non-branded products. Okay? So, the plaintiffs in the case weren't saying that they needed to break up Blue Cross.

They weren't even saying that one Blue Cross plan would compete with another Blue Cross plan with a Blue Cross product in the same state because that might confuse people, right? Okay, Blue Cross is complaining with Blue Cross? It's like I'm going crazy. No. You have to change the name. It would be non-branded. They would call it something else. But the underlying corporate entity would be one Blue Cross plan, and another corporate entity would be a Blue Cross plan. And as long as they had non-branded products, they could compete with each other.

They couldn't be forbidden from doing that by the association anymore. Now, there are other examples of possible collusion all over the place in healthcare. Some examples that are previously mentioned on a Healthcare See. SureScripts, which is the electronic prescribing platform between a physician's office and the pharmacy, as you can imagine, you have all these different physician's offices, and they go to one central hub, and then that one central hub then divvies it out to the correct pharmacy. That whole software platform that does that is called SureScripts.

And guess who owns SureScripts? ExpressScripts and CVS. What? You mean to tell me that two competitors own the same e-prescribing platform, and that e-prescribing platform prohibits other groups like Amazon's Pill Pack from using them? And that's okay? Now, they've got to suit against them right now for that. Next up, Prime Therapeutics, which is the PBM for a lot of other Blue Cross plans, partners with ExpressScripts, which is another PBM, in regards to a group purchasing organization called Ascent Health Services that's based in Switzerland in order to collect pharmaceutical company payments.

So a pharmaceutical company is going to pay Ascent Health Services, which is owned by ExpressScripts, but then that money is going to make its way over to Prime Therapeutics from the pharmaceutical company. What? How is... Aren't they competitors? Why are they working together on this? That makes no sense. Okay? So really, the point here is not so much about the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association. The point here is that this had to be brought by private citizens and private organizations, using private lawyers, to enforce the Antitrust Act.

The Sherman Antitrust Act needs to be enforced. You don't even need new laws. You don't need any new laws. You just need to enforce the laws that exist. And this has happened under both Republican administrations, it's happened under Democratic administrations. The point is, who is protecting us if the government won't even protect us from collusion and cartels? That's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare's Lead..

