Title: Book Review   7 Habits of Highly Effective People_oQOj4r-aDbk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQOj4r-aDbk
Language: en
Duration: 7:16
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be doing our second book review and it is The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. Now I want to start off by saying that we're going to run through these 7 habits specifically as they relate to HR and employee benefits and specifically in terms of things that we all can do today. So what can we take action on today? Now I want to start out also by saying too that I have probably one claim to fame and now one claim to fame is I am probably the only physician in America who has personally presented at over 200 open enrollment meetings with employees.

So literally I have seen this with my own eyes. So we're going to apply these 7 Habits of Highly Effective People to a specific employer that I used to work with to show how this employer implemented these 7 Habits to achieve great results with their employee benefit plan. Let me start off also by saying that this employer was particularly parsimonious. So believe me, they did not spend much money on any of the things we're going to talk about. Okay, habit number one is be proactive. That means let's focus on things that we can actually control.

Okay, so we have a circle of concern. Things that we're concerned about government regulation, healthcare costs, blah, blah, blah. But like what can we actually control? And let's focus on that. Well one thing that employee benefits certainly can control is how annual enrollment or open enrollment occurs. And so this particular retail employer, they did a recorded webinar. You can use WebEx or GoToMeeting or whoever. It is dirt cheap to subscribe. You record it. You send out an email link. You can even keep track of who's watching, who hasn't watched it.

And it will allow people to then pause or rewind or go to it at another time so that they actually can be appropriately educated about their benefit plan. And then you can use it during employee onboarding for all the new employees that you bring on outside of the open enrollment period. Number two, begin with the end in mind. What is our goal here with annual enrollment or with communication in general? It's really that goal is to actually to appreciate the goose and the golden eggs, right? So that's the old Aesop fable of the goose that leg the golden egg.

And then the farmer got greedy, killed the goose and found out that there were no golden eggs inside, right? So the golden eggs are actual healthcare benefits. And the goose is the actual health plan itself. Now most people don't even think about their health insurance or their employee benefits with their work. It's like a non-thought. So how in the world are we going to get people to change their behavior in regards to their benefits if they don't even appreciate it? So our goal is to just appreciate the goose of the employee health plan and just appreciate the golden eggs of the actual benefits themselves.

Because you're spending like $10,000 per employee per year on this, it would be such a waste for people to not appreciate that investment on the part of the employer. Okay, next up. First things first. Okay, so we've got a gazillion priorities. What do we prioritize? Well, in regards to appreciating it, where do people listen to a company on a daily basis? Do they listen to HR on a daily basis? Do they listen to benefits on a daily basis? No. They listen to their managers, to their specific supervisor or lead or boss or what have you.

And so this retail employer said, hey listen, we need to create a management communication channel. We need to, because it was a retailer, they had sales people on the floor. They had IT people doing online sales. They had huge warehouses with people taking down huge pieces of furniture off the shelves and putting them into trucks and driving them out to homes. Okay. So they knew that they had to have a communication path out through those management structures. And so they specifically met with the leaders within those management and they said, hey, for your particular area of management, how are we going to communicate to your particular department? Okay.

That's within our control. We can control that so that we don't just say, oh, well, I sent out an email from HR and nobody listened to it. No, you do it through the people that the frontline employees interact with on a daily basis and that's their direct management. Okay. Next up, think win-win, right? What do the employees and their families care about? We want them to win. We want them to win. And unless we own them winning, then we don't stand a chance at, you know, us winning. In other words, having the goose hang around and be sustainable.

Okay. Well, how can you do that? By focusing on health and quality, health and quality, health and quality, health and quality. That is the win-win scenario. Nobody's going to be against health and nobody's going to be against the quality of care. It is the absolute first message to discuss because nothing else will happen unless you focus on those things first. Okay. Next up, seek first to understand and then be understood. So how in the world can employee benefits and HR seek first to understand? This employer did focus groups with their employees and with the management.

They said, tell us, talk to us. We want to listen to you. Okay. What does that cost? Like no money. Maybe you have to buy them lunch. Maybe it costs you some time, but this is actually really easy stuff to do. You just got to do it. Okay. Next, synergize, which means appreciate the differences. Well, what's one of the huge differences in an employee health plan is the actual employees versus people that don't work at the company. In other words, the spouses. Okay. So guess what this company did? They took those recorded webinars and they said, hey, let's have the spouses watch that.

Now they required it. They required the spouses to watch it. You can do whatever you want. You can enter them into a raffle, et cetera, et cetera. But that was super important because for this particular employer, guess what? Half their claims spend came from spouses. Half their claims. Half their claims spend the average amount of expenses. And that's why they were going to get their own expenses. So if you just educate the employees, you're basically only educating like 50% of the cost of your plan. Okay. And then last up, sharpen the saw.

Okay. What does that mean? We've got to have fun while we're doing this. We have to celebrate our successes. And there is no department of fun or department of celebration within a company, right? That's what Jack Welch said when he was at GE. So it's beholden upon HR and benefits to really have fun and celebrate. They made the webinar fun. There was an oil and gas services company that made their video to their employees like fun for benefits, okay? You can do it. And that's actually part of our responsibility is to make it fun and to celebrate the wins of people having fantastic care and recovery.

And you can ask them. And oftentimes they're actually very willing to share that with the company, okay? So that is our review of the seven habits of highly effective people. We are in control of some things, not everything, but let's start doing it and rolling up our sleeves. Thank you so much for watching A Healthcare Z..

