Title: Brief Compass History_Y9DkukH10Pc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y9DkukH10Pc
Language: en
Duration: 3:23
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello again, Eric Bricker here with A Healthcare Z and today I want to give you a brief history of Compass Professional Health Services. And I'll try to make it as brief as possible. So Compass was actually originally founded in 2005. In fact, it was the same weekend that Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans. I remember it very well. And we actually did not start supporting our first employer client until the summer of 2007. So we were doing a lot of behind the scenes work but had the wonderful opportunity to have our first employer client over 11 years ago.

And we then subsequently grew the business from that one client to over 2,000 employer clients as of 2018. And these clients are some of the largest Fortune 500 companies in America. And they are also companies with just one or two employees. Majority of Compass' clients were in the mid-market. So kind of 50 to 500 to 1,000 employees. Which is why I'm talking to insurance brokers, benefit consultants, and HR professionals because there are so many companies that are in that size. Right? Because there's a few very large companies that have a lot of employees.

But there's a ton of these medium-sized businesses that really make up the bulk of what so much of you do. And so Compass was tools and support for healthcare consumers. It was subsequently purchased by Alight Solutions in the summer of 2018. And Alight is a wonderful benefits administrative technology platform that's usually used by very large corporations. And so I'm just very excited for the opportunity to combine with them and their wonderful people and their team. And so we grew Compass to almost 300 people.

We were located in Dallas, Texas. And it has just been an amazing experience being able to work with all of you as employee benefits professionals as you really try to solve a lot of problems for your employees and their families related to health insurance and healthcare costs and healthcare quality and claims and insurance renewals and the Affordable Care Act and policy changes and regulation and compliance. And at the end of the day, all of us are really involved in something special. And that is the alleviation of suffering and the extension of life.

So at the end of the day, you know, the word patient means to suffer. And so, you know, we talk about money and we talk about quality and we talk about all these things in the abstract. But really, at the end of the day, people are really like physically hurting or they're having trouble breathing or they're having trouble walking. So these are just very basic disabilities and pain and suffering that actually you contribute to, contribute to solving. And so if we can all solve that better together, well then I think that's worth doing.

So thank you so much for joining me today. Thank you so much for joining me today. Thank you so much for joining me today..

