Title: Budget Mistake Kills Employee Health Plans_46u_obZlbHk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=obZlbHk
Language: en
Duration: 7:46
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is budget mistake that kills employee health plans. So let me tell you a story about a conversation I had with the head of benefits, really the former head of benefits for a Fortune 100 corporation here in America. And he was the head of benefits there for over 15 years, I think it was close to 20 years. Hugely successful. He actually not only kept their trend flat, he like had a 10 year stretch where the trend actually went down.

And they had 97,000 employees. So this is a huge organization, huge healthcare budget. And he said to me something that was fascinating. He said, my approach to the health plan was, I treated it like a business from an accounting perspective. And his organization treated the employee health plan as like a business within the business. From an accounting perspective. So let's go through what that looks like. Because this is a huge deal that this company and this head of benefits were unique and different compared to what most companies in America do.

America do. Okay. So when they ran it like a business, what do all businesses have? They have an income statement. Right? We talked about that in the accounting video. I'll leave a link to it in the show notes. In other words, you have your profit and loss. Okay. Well, your revenue for your employee health plan, well, that's your budget. That's coming from the mothership, the main corporation, right? And then you have to subtract out your cost of goods sold from your revenue. Okay. Well, in the case of an employee health plan, your cost of goods sold is the claims.

And what does that leave you with? Your gross profit or loss. Okay. Then you subtract out your operating expenses. For an employee health plan, what are your operating expenses? They're your own benefits staff, right? So you got your director of benefits, maybe a benefits manager, maybe a variety of benefits analysts, et cetera. There's many corporations that actually have their own nurse case manager on staff. There's some organizations that even employ their own doctors for their employee clinics. Okay. So all those things would go under your operating expenses.

Then you have your expenses for your benefits consultants. Then you also have your ASO fee for your carrier. Then you have the various fees for your various vendors. And then maybe you're paying out premium for stop loss for specific and aggregate stop loss as well. And that leaves you with your final operating income or loss. Now, here's where most organizations get it wrong. The operating expense of the HR staff, the consultants, the ASO, the vendor fees, stop loss, premium, et cetera. That is a separate budget item outside the employee health plan.

In other words, they measure employee health plan performance by just the gross profit or loss, by what the budget is and then what the COGS are. And so the budget for the operating expense is in a totally different part of their overall corporate budget. It's like mixed in with their overall HR budget, which might include like payroll and training and recruiting. And so you, and these are all the staff, the consultants, the ASO fees, the vendor fees, the stop loss fees. These are all the fixed fees. So they, they are not running their employee health plan like a business because they're not budgeting for the fixed costs and they're not even including the fixed costs in their employee health plan costs.

Instead, what this head of benefits did and what his company did was that the operating expense and then the budget for that operating expense was part of the overall health plan budget. And then the overall operating income or loss of the health plan was how they measured the financial performance of the health plan. Okay. Now, so the wrong thing to do is to have the operating expenses in a separate budget. And the right thing to do is to have the operating expenses in the overall health plan budget. Well, shoot, health insurance carriers are incredibly smart and they're like, aha, because they, the employers keep a very keen eye on their fixed costs, but they don't pay as close attention to their claims costs.

They don't get the data. They don't know how to analyze the data. Then burying our costs in the claims is a great way to improve our revenue. So not only the carriers, but also other vendors, they bury their costs in the claims. They hide their costs in the claims. What are some examples of that? All the PBM rebate revenue is hidden in the claims. Large telemedicine vendors charge incredibly low fixed fee PEPM costs, but all of their revenue is buried in the claims. They charge visit fees for their telemedicine services.

The vast majority of the telemedicine revenue is in their visit fees. It's not in their fixed fees. Okay. Why is this a problem? It's because your health plan is, it's just propagating the fee for service financial misalignment. Okay. When your company budgets this way, you're probably doing this without even realizing it. All you're doing is you're propagating fee for service misalignment. Instead, what this head of benefits did is he said, look, measure me over the operating income or loss for the entire health plan budget, including all the fixed costs and measure me and my performance based on that number of total health plan income or loss.

And then base my bonus off total operating income or loss, right? Because you have to have financial alignment for the head of benefits. So the head of benefits. And so what did he do? What did he find? He found that he could, if he spent more on his operating expenses, then he could decrease his claims costs. If you spend more on your operating expenses, you can spend proportionally less on your claims expenses. All the money is in the claims. And so this is where so many employers get it wrong. In fact, you, by definition, you want your fixed fees going up.

You want an onsite near site clinic that has fixed fees. Like the best practice of all these organizations in terms of lowering healthcare costs is having an onsite near site clinic or having, so like by definition, that's going to increase your operating expenses. And so, but that's okay because your overall operating income is going to improve when you increase your operating expenses because you're going to have an even larger decrease in your claims expense. Okay. And that has been proven over and over and over again.

Look, this is an opportunity for consultants to make more money. This is an opportunity for HR, for the head of benefits to hire more staff. This is an opportunity for carriers to charge higher ASO fees as they should. Okay. Because you need to quit hiding your fees in the claims. Okay. So remember, you can't measure to improve. Okay. You can't even get your claims data. You can't even analyze your claims data. Shoot, you're totally hosed with this current setup. Okay. So change your budget. Show your CFO this video. I'll give you the name and phone number of this gentleman.

This is not an Eric Bricker solution. Okay. This is a Fortune 100 solution that has proven to be effective. I just want to share it with you. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

