Title: Certificate of Need - Law That Limits Number of Hospitals_HpXG-Jxsmuk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HpXG-Jxsmuk
Language: en
Duration: 3:48
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing certificate of need or what is referred to as CON. Now, certificate of need is where there is regulation of hospital beds and hospital construction by the state. So isn't that interesting that there is actually state regulation over the expansion and the construction of new hospitals? Well, why in the world does that exist? Well, it was created about 40 plus years ago in an attempt to control healthcare costs.

The idea being is that, well, if you had more hospital beds and more hospitals, that they would induce, in other words, it would be supplier induced demand of healthcare services and so healthcare costs would be higher. But if you look at, I won't summarize all the research here, but at the end of the day, the end of that, it's kind of meh. Like maybe it did, maybe it didn't, maybe certificate of need actually even increased the cost of healthcare. It's really not clear. Okay. So let's break it down specifically by state.

So there are 35 states that have certificate of need laws. It doesn't really divide itself by conservative versus liberal states. So you can see the liberal state of Massachusetts and the conservative state of Alabama both have certificate of need laws, which you would think would be more of a liberal democratic initiative for regulation. Okay. Now on the opposite side, you have 15 states that do not have certificate of need and you have the liberal state of California and the more conservative state of Texas that do not have these laws.

And you think of more like, you know, free enterprise and less regulation as being more of a conservative or Republican thing, right? So this whole certificate of need law thing doesn't necessarily correlate with sort of red state, blue state stuff. Okay. Now let's look at it in terms of commercial insurance healthcare costs by state. And let's look at the 10 most and the 10 least expensive states. So the 10 most expensive states for healthcare are New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, New Jersey, West Virginia, New York, Illinois, DC, Massachusetts, and Alaska.

Okay. So you can see that two of those high cost states, they don't have any certificate of need. And eight of those 10 health cost kids, they do have a certificate of need. So here, the certificate of need was supposed to lower healthcare costs. And the majority of them have that law. And you're talking $21,000 per family per year, again, for commercial insurance. Okay. Now for low cost states, the 10 lowest cost states are North Dakota, Idaho, New Mexico, Utah, Iowa, Mississippi, Tennessee, Hawaii, Arkansas, and Alabama.

Okay. Again, you kind of see that four of the lowest cost states have no certificate of need law. So you can like build hospitals, expand them as much as you want. It's not breaking the bank in these states. Likewise, in these low cost states, you might say, okay, well, maybe that certificate of need law is like super effective because it's keeping costs down in Iowa and Hawaii and Tennessee and places like that. Okay. But at the end of the day, again, and by the way, the family health care cost there is $18,000 per family per year.

Okay. So it's like 17% more, $3,000 more per family per year in these high cost states versus these low cost states. So again, I think the most important word on this entire slide is like, man. So what's the point? The point is, is that we all need to be very careful when we think about regulation as a solution to the health care cost problem. Maybe it is a solution. Maybe it's not a solution. Maybe the best intended solutions around costs do not have their intended consequence. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a health care seat.

Thank you. You.

