Title: Ch. 10 - Healthcare Money Campfire Stories Audio Book_JTZ6814BSPA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JTZ6814BSPA
Language: en
Duration: 9:34
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Healthcare Money Campfire Stories by Eric Bricker, M.D. Chapter 10 They're Gonna Do This Compass had moved from a two-room office to a five-room office about six months earlier. It was a stretch. We were only going to take four rooms, but Scott smartly decided to splurge on the lease for a fifth room, a small corner conference room with windows on two sides. The lease was $1,100 a month. We were in a white two-story office building in a not-so-safe part of Dallas. We checked the internet map of local crime. There were a lot of car break-ins and theft, but no violent crime.

We thought, that's not too bad. We took what we could afford. Compass at that time was comprised of three founders and one additional employee. We had about a dozen non-paying customers and four paying customers, the largest of which was the 500-employee title insurance company. We were losing money, but not much, since we only had one employee and a cruddy office. The three founders were taking little to no salary. To save money, we assembled our own compass brochures. We created a short assembly line of three people, one to assemble the booklet, one to affix the glue dots, and one to stick the wallet cards onto the glue dots.

Repeat. We could do about eight a minute, which is about 500 an hour. We called them packet parties. As the sales guy for Compass, I had been meeting with various insurance brokers and employers for the past two years. Some weeks were slow with no meetings or phone conversations. However, things were slowly gaining steam. I went from no meetings to some meetings to some repeat meetings to a handful of formal proposal requests to a handful of closed deals. Progress was being made slowly. Our phones were ringing and emails were coming in from our members.

Our one employee and the three founders worked together to solve every health care problem. One highlight was a bill for $18,000 that a hospital had sent to a member. The bill was in error. His insurance company had already paid, but the hospital felt like it was due more payment. Details aside, we negotiated with the hospital to write off the $18,000 after about three months of work. The member was a man in his early 60s who was going to retire soon. He had some land out in the country in addition to his home in the suburbs.

The land had an old single-wide trailer on it, and he wanted to replace it with a double-wide trailer. It was going to be his retirement home in a couple years. He had delayed the purchase of the double-wide trailer because of the large hospital bill. With the bill gone, he moved ahead with his plans. He was so grateful. It was his dream to live out in the country full-time. Obviously, he and his wife weren't scraping by since they had a second home, or trailer rather, but it was still a big deal to him. One of the insurance brokers that I met while attending a local trade association luncheon had a connection at a national retail company.

After several phone calls and meetings with this broker, we arranged to have an in-person meeting with the lead benefits consultant for the retailer at our Compass office. The meeting was five of us, three Compass founders, the insurance broker, John, and the benefits consultant, Don. Wanting to make a good first impression, we dressed in suits and ties. John and Don arrived in golf shirts and slacks. I have come to learn this is frequent insurance attire in the South. John was an enthusiastic believer in our Compass mission to navigate people effectively through the healthcare system, and Don was smart and highly inquisitive.

We showed John and Don our data and software. Don got so excited, he started laughing. They've got to see this, he said. By they, he meant his retail client. Two hours later, our meeting ended with vigorous handshakes and their promise to speak with the HR and finance people at the retailer about Compass. A week later, I received a call from Don. People from the company wanted to come to our office for a visit next month. This company had about 13,000 employees. We had four. The day of the big meeting came. Our guests from the retailer had flown in for the day from another state.

Don was there too. We had arranged for lunches from a local deli. Our CEO, Scott, picked up the food. We did not want to risk the food being late because of a delivery snag. We started the meeting and began to learn more about the retailer's particular challenge. The previous year, the retailer had moved to a consumer-directed health plan with a higher deductible and they had seen substantial savings in their medical and pharmacy claims. However, the employees and management did not like it. There were many complaints.

People could not find pricing information about medical services in advance. They were receiving bills from doctors and hospitals that were confusing and seemed wrong. Which ones do they need to pay? Which ones do they need to fight? When they went to the pharmacy, they were being asked to pay hundreds of dollars rather than a $10 copay. Ironically, a local hospital system had moved all of its employees to a consumer-directed health plan the year before as well. The employees hated it so much that the executives were forced to switch back to the low-deductible PPO plan the very next year and the VP of HR was fired.

The retailer did not want either of those things to happen. They had to find a solution and they found it in Compass. Three hours later, the meeting concluded. The senior HR and financial executives helped clear the wrappers and bottles from lunch off the table and threw them in the trash themselves. They did not just leave it. They did not expect it to be done for them. It was a little thing, but it was emblematic of their company culture. Rather than a large corporation, it was more like a small family company where everyone pitched in and no job was too small for anyone, including clearing the table after lunch.

I received a call about two weeks later from Don. They're going to do this. You've got to be kidding me, I said to Don. I didn't mean to. It slipped out. I meant to portray a sense of assuredness rather than shock. Not only was this retailer our first major corporate client, it was a national household name and would represent enough revenue to pay for the additional employees that we would need to support them. Fast forward two months later. We were working on implementation for the group. We had assembled 13,000 compass brochures, or rather, we had found a way to outsource brochure assembly, which was much more scalable than our in-house, quote, packet parties.

However, we still needed to sort and assemble those brochures into 385 packages for delivery to each of the stores nationwide. By this time, we had three additional employees totaling four health pros plus the three founders. Scott, Cliff, and one of our health pros and I were on our hands and knees on the floor stuffing packages with brochures and affixing mailing labels. You can imagine 385 packages spread out across brown office carpeting. We had also been kicked out of our office space because another tenant was expanding and our lease was month to month.

On short notice, we had found a mildly more presentable building in an only mildly nicer neighborhood with five times the space. Again, Scott was smart to splurge on the amount of space. I thought it was too much. It looked ridiculously empty with only seven people in it, but we ended up needing all the space very quickly. The packets went out. Within a few days, the phone started to ring and the email started coming in with health care requests. We went from 2,000 employee members to 15,000 employee members overnight.

Our first four employees were just the start of a string of amazing hires. They worked hard and fast. They were quick learners, never made any excuses, and always had a positive attitude. This was at the depths of the Great Recession, and we all knew it was do or die. Screw this up, and we were all out of a job. Needless to say, it was a success. Yes, the employees had a knowledgeable resource to turn to in Compass. Many of their out-of-pocket costs could be reduced, and finding the best doctor for the employees often resulted in them not needing expensive tests or procedures.

I continued working on sales. Two months later, I landed a high-level meeting with a National Hospitality Corporation, another household name. We met. It went well. But at the end of the meeting, their director of benefits asked, do you have any major clients similar in size to us that I could talk to? I smiled. As a matter of fact, Compass's rapid growth began. The next few years were a blur. Meeting, meeting, meeting. Sell, sell, sell. Implement, implement, implement. Hire, train, support members, repeat. Lesson learned.

Sometimes you need a miracle. There is no reason a 13,000 employee company should ever use a four-person vendor. If I were them, I would not have hired us. But they did. You just have to stick around long enough for the miracle to happen. To this day, I buy all my suits from that retailer. Healthcare improvement in America also needs a miracle, or rather, many miracles. Some of those miracles will be big. Most of them will be small. But we need to keep at it..

