Title: Ch. 16 - Healthcare Money Campfire Stories Audio Book_cqzDjF1y5Gs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cqzDjF1y5Gs
Language: en
Duration: 7:55
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Healthcare Money Campfire Stories by Eric Bricker, MD. Chapter 16. Target, a Pathfinder, and a New Place. One of the most amazing things about Compass was the opportunities it created for our employees. When I started Compass with Scott and Cliff, I never imagined that giving people a job could be so rewarding. I just wanted to help people in their health and healthcare. I had no desire to be a source of income or livelihood for people. That was probably just short-sighted on my part. As previously mentioned, Compass started gaining traction in hiring employees at the bottom of the Great Recession in 2009.

For a recent college graduate, it was a terrible time. Many people were unemployed or taking jobs that did not require a college degree. Many recent graduates moved back in with their families. In some respects, their adulthood was being delayed. Our second employee, Julia, had grown up in the area and lived at home while going to a local four-year college. She had graduated with good grades only to take a job as a checkout clerk at Target. Never one to complain, she appreciated having any job even though it did not pay enough for her to move out and rent an apartment of her own.

Being very bright, her job at Target did not challenge her mentally the way she could be challenged. She had tremendous talent in organizational skills, interpersonal communication, and creative problem solving. She made an ideal health pro and the Compass position was perfect for further developing those amazing skills that she had. There was certainly nothing wrong with working at Target. However, she had the ability to grow professionally and apply her talents to helping people who had complicated problems navigating their healthcare and health insurance.

During her time at Compass, one of the members that Julia assisted died. We would have some members at Compass pass away over the years. When people are sick with cancer or heart disease, they don't always recover. Julia had been working with him and his wife for several months on bills, prescriptions, and coordinating care toward the end of his life. After he passed away, the bills kept coming. If you die, the doctors and hospitals still expect payment. The member's widow kept communicating with Julia who kept working on the bills for months.

Eventually, all the bills stopped coming and Julia had finished determining which bills were correct and needed payment by insurance, which needed payment by the widow, and which needed to be removed because they were incorrect. A week later, Julia received an email from the head of HR at the company where the member had worked. The head of HR had received an email from the widow expressing her gratitude for the Compass service and, more importantly, Julia. The head of HR had never received an email like this, and not only did she forward on the widow's email to Julia, but she added her own appreciation as well.

If my memory serves me right, Julia did not bring the email to my attention. She was too modest to show off her great work. However, she had shared the nice note with one of her co-workers to show the impact they were having on people's lives. It was this co-worker who brought the email to my attention. Wow! Amazing! Julia was the perfect person, in the perfect place, at the perfect time, to help this man, his widow, and the employer. Years after the event, Julia and I would still reminisce about it. Like Julia, Ray was a recent college graduate from a large state school and was living at home.

Ray drove a Nissan Pathfinder from the 1990s. It was about 13 years old, and it was a gas guzzler. Ray had a special knack with people when they were upset. He always remained calm, showed tremendous empathy, and was able to cool them off so they could rationally describe the health care problem they were having. When people are dealing with medical bills and prescription costs, their emotions tend to run high. There is a sense of unfairness. Many people are angry. Angry at their insurance company. Angry at the hospital.

Even sometimes angry at their doctor. Because Ray was so good with people when they were upset, we assigned Ray to those members that had health insurance policies with the most out-of-pocket costs. These members received the most bills intended to be irate. These members would usually call rather than email their questions. Since they were upset, they needed someone to vent to. They would vent to Ray. Eventually, almost a year went by, and I was chatting with Ray at his cubicle, which was tucked away back in a corner.

Ray was excited to tell me that he had just bought a new, used car. He finally was able to afford to get rid of the gas guzzling Pathfinder, and he had bought a pre-owned Volkswagen Jetta. It was as if Ray had won the lottery. He was so happy. I was happy for him. I think part of the reason Ray was so happy was that his Pathfinder was so run down that it was embarrassing to drive. He was dating a young woman, and I think he was self-conscious about his vehicle. Maybe I'm reading too much into it, but to work, provide value, get paid, and then take that money and use it for an improvement in your life feels good.

It's incredibly satisfying. I could see that satisfaction on Ray's face. Stacy was yet another recent graduate from a major Texas university. She, too, had not been working since graduation and was living at home with her parents and 6th grade sister. Stacy was health pro number 4 at Compass and was hired at almost the same time as Julia. She was assigned as one of the main health pros for the 13,000 employee retail client, and she knocked it out of the park. I would have client phone calls with the retailer's HR executives, and they would say that the employees were singing the praises about Stacy by name.

Stacy and I even developed a program where we would have three-way calls with her, the member, and myself to go over more complex medical issues related to conditions like multiple sclerosis, Crohn's disease, or cancer. I would not give medical advice, but together Stacy and I would devise a strategy for the member to get to the right type of doctor with the right expertise and communicate the plan to the member. Like Ray, one day Stacy came bouncing into work. I was in the small kitchen of our office pouring coffee when we ran into each other.

What's going on? I asked. I just got an apartment, she replied. Wow. Stacy continued to explain that she had been looking at places for several weeks and finally decided on a brand new apartment building in a suburb of Dallas, on the other side of town from her parents. I'm sure that was just a coincidence. It's so cute. It's a one-bedroom. I can't wait to decorate it. Selfishly, I felt great that Stacy felt so great. She had worked toward a goal of moving out of her parents' house. She had saved up for over a year. She was moving out and she was thrilled.

Many of our other Compass employees had worked for us for several years and then gone on to careers as account managers at insurance brokerages and benefit consulting firms. Others became managers in HR at corporations or administrators at hospitals and insurance carriers. Some went on to law school or medical school. Our employees were getting married, having children, and buying homes of their own. It was the best thing ever to watch. Lesson learned. Helping people navigate their healthcare and health insurance is a great driver of job creation.

The value derived from making the healthcare experience smoother, higher quality, and lower cost for patients can be translating into a meaningful income which can allow people to achieve their goals in life. Business can be an amazing thing..

