Title: Ch. 13 - Healthcare Money Campfire Stories Audio Book_ua1DI9_Pg9E
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pg9E
Language: en
Duration: 7:59
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Healthcare Money Campfire Stories by Eric Bricker, M.D. Chapter 13, The Right Doctor At Compass, one of the main things we did for our employer clients was to help their employees find doctors that met their specific needs. That need might be based on location, availability, or clinical expertise. One Compass client was a municipality in Florida. One of the employees at the municipality had a daughter, Ms. T, who was on the group's health insurance policy as well. Ms. T needed assistance from Compass. Ms. T was a 20-year-old student at the local community college.

She had a part-time job as well. Unfortunately, Ms. T had been having chronic abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting after eating for the last several years. Her condition had progressively worsened. She had initially gone to the emergency room several times for her symptoms and had been referred to a gastroenterologist, commonly referred to as a GI doctor, for follow-up. She had been going to this local GI doctor for over a year. During this time, the doctor had performed an upper endoscopy, colonoscopy, and multiple other tests and had diagnosed Ms.

T with gastroparesis. Gastroparesis is a motility disorder of the stomach where the food moves through the stomach and into the small intestine much more slowly than it should. As a result, the stomach becomes backed up, leading to the abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. It has a broad range of severity, with some cases being so severe that the patient needs to have a permanent tube placed through their skin and into their stomach to allow the contents to be removed or, quote-unquote, vented when it backs up.

At first, the GI doctor started her on a handful of medications. However, her symptoms only worsened. First, it was more visits to the ER, then several hospitalizations. She was in so much pain and discomfort from the vomiting that she eventually had to quit her part-time job and then later had to drop out of junior college. Her GI doctor tried his best. He repeated the upper endoscopy. He changed some medications. Then he added more medications. And more. And more. Eventually, she was on almost 10 medications. After one year, five ER visits, and four hospitalizations of over a week each, both she and her family were at wit's end.

She was only getting worse and had lost a lot of weight. She was under a doctor's care. She thought she was doing the right thing. Ms. T and her father contacted Compass to see what else they could do. Gastroparesis is a difficult-to-treat condition within the specialty of gastroenterology. The GI tract stretches from the mouth to the rectum and includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and large intestine. This tube is filled with a very complex network of nerves. There are so many nerves that the GI tract has the second-highest number of neurons outside of the brain and spinal cord.

These nerves allow the GI tract to move food along in wave-like motions called peristalsis. Just like catching a wave at the beach, timing is everything. And if the timing of those waves is not coordinated correctly by the electrical impulses of the neurons, then the food does not move forward properly and you can have various problems, including gastroparesis. Fortunately for Ms. T, there is a branch of the famous Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Florida. The main Mayo Clinic hospital and medical school are in Rochester, Minnesota, but Mayo had created a hospital and associated clinics in Florida years ago.

Better yet, Compass had located and connected with the Florida Mayo's dedicated gastroparesis clinic. This clinic was staffed by a gastroenterologist, nurse, and other staff that specifically diagnosed and treated gastroparesis. Not heartburn, not stomach ulcers, not colon polyps, just gastroparesis. The gastroparesis clinic also had a pain management specialist, psychiatrist, counselors, and a support group. Because the GI tract has so many nerves, stress and emotions must be addressed. Additionally, the gastroparesis clinic had an intensive three-week outpatient program where all the specialists would meet with the patient.

Ms. T and her father made the four-hour drive to Mayo and had the initial appointment and were enrolled in the three-week outpatient program. Details aside, by the end of the three weeks, Ms. T had gone from almost 10 medications to two and her symptoms had dramatically improved. She was gaining weight and better able to function. She returned home. Several months later, our Compass Health Pro, Emily, who had assisted Ms. T and her father, traveled to the municipality for their employee benefits vendor fair. Sometimes these events are called wellness fairs or employee health conferences.

It is an opportunity for employees to learn more about the services that are available to them, from medical and dental insurance to their 401k retirement plan. Emily stood at her booth, like all the other vendors, except she was greeted by a joyful hug from the father of Ms. T. He told Emily the rest of the story. When Ms. T returned home, she eventually was able to re-enroll in school. After trying that out and having it go well with her gastroparesis, she returned to her part-time job. She was happy, smiling, and able to live a life she had not lived in several years.

Ms. T's recovery had a positive impact on her whole family. Ms. T's father said the Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville had saved them all. When Emily told me this whole story, I could not contain myself. I was so excited. We had seen firsthand the power of connecting a patient in need with, one, the right doctor, two, the right expertise, and three, with the right team, and four, with the right intensity and frequency of visits. That's how the magic happens. That's how healthcare gets solved. Lesson learned. There is a real mismatch problem in healthcare.

Patients and diseases are highly variable. Some diseases are easy. For example, strep throat. Some diseases are hard. For example, gastroparesis. Doctors' skill is also highly variable. Some doctors and medical teams are a little skilled in a lot of things. Some are more skilled in a few things. Some are very skilled in only one thing. And some are not very skilled in anything. The key to high-quality diagnosis and treatment is to have the easy diseases treated by the medical teams that have a little skill in a lot of areas.

If the disease is more complicated, the patient needs to be referred to a specialist rapidly. If the disease is too complicated for that specialist, the patient needs to be referred to a subspecialist rapidly. This escalation of the patient to the right doctor with the right expertise at the right time requires competence and humility on the part of the doctor and the right financial incentives. In today's world, the doctor loses money when they refer the patient to someone else. Solving this mismatch problem won't fix everything, but healthcare quality and cost problems probably will not be solved until patients are referred correctly.

The great news is this is a solvable problem. The great news is this is a solvable problem..

