Title: Ch. 11 - Healthcare Money Campfire Stories Audio Book_viv9QpSfOho
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=viv9QpSfOho
Language: en
Duration: 5:28
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Healthcare Money Campfire Stories by Eric Bricker, MD. Chapter 11. We have a problem. Company C had a problem. Company C is a restaurant chain that sold hamburgers, fries, and alcohol. The Great Recession of 2008-2009 had reached its lows, and gasoline was $4 to $6 per gallon across the country. People stopped going out to eat. The $20 they would have paid for a meal out was now being spent at the pump. Sales were tumbling. Their stock was in free fall. The layoffs began. Company C's employee health plan looked a lot like most companies' health plans.

They had a preferred provider organization, PPO, plan with a several hundred dollar deductible, co-pays for office visits and prescriptions, and co-insurance, a percent of the medical bills to be paid by the patient, for lab tests, x-rays, and MRIs. When all these out-of-pocket costs added up to about $2,000, the out-of-pocket maximum, the health plan would then cover all the costs. This employee health plan cost Company C about what it cost most other companies, about $10,000 per employee per year, and it had been increasing about 7% per year.

If any number increases at 7% per year, it will double in about 10 years. At the current pace, their employee health plan would cost $20,000 per employee by the year 2019. The CFO called Company C's Director of Employee Benefits. We have a problem. There were multiple ways to lower health care costs, with one of the newer ones being a consumer-directed health plan, CDHP. I'll spare you the details, but a CDHP has a higher deductible and no co-pays for doctor visits or prescription medication. The company gives the employees health care dollars on a debit card that they can spend on deductible expenses.

Those health care dollars would also roll over year to year so the employee could save them for future health care needs. A CDHP ends up lowering health care costs by about 5% to 15%, and the annual increase in a CDHP plan is only about half that of a PPO plan. For Company C, that would mean their health plan costs would go down $1,500 per employee in the first year, and in 10 years would only be about $12,000 per employee per year instead of $20,000 per employee per year. There are other advantages, too.

Higher rates of preventative care, higher rates of adherence to clinical care guidelines, etc. However, there are problems with a CDHP. It is not perfect. One problem is that when people have health care dollars to spend, they have no idea what anything costs and no idea how to navigate the broken system of doctor, hospital, and health insurance billing. It is a disaster. There are other problems, too. Patients might avoid needed care because they can't afford it and end up sicker. Medical bills go to collection and damage people's credit, etc.

Compass was the right service for Company C because Compass allowed them to change their employee health plan from a PPO to a CDHP while giving their employees and their families a resource to take the billing disaster off their hands. Compass even had an economics PhD from a world-renowned university do a study on the price per MRI spending before and after the implementation of the CDHP at Company C. He found that the average cost for an MRI for the company's health plan dropped because the employees were going to less expensive facilities for their scans.

The director of employee benefits and her team traveled the country for several years, educating the employees about the CDHP. They listened to employee feedback and tweaked the benefit program every year. They also took feedback on the employee experiences from Compass to adjust the program more. They analyzed their medical claims. The CDHP worked. Company C had lowered their employee health plan costs not by 15%, but almost 30%, and their health care cost trend had remained below the national level of health care inflation.

The director of employee benefits at Company C was a hero. Company C had saved so much money on their employee health plan that they did not have to lay off as many people as expected. Reducing health care waste was resulting in saving jobs. The economy recovered. The price of gas went down. People started going back out to eat. With a more cost-effective employee health plan, Company C's earnings grew rapidly, and the stock soared up 600% from 2008 to 2015. Company C had some executive changes. The CEO retired. The new CEO brought in a new CFO and a new VP of human resources.

They offered the director of employee benefits early retirement. She left. The director of employee benefits at Company C had pulled off a miracle. If there was an employee benefits hall of fame, she would be in it. She was a central reason for the company's recent financial success. She was probably worth 10 times her salary. Lesson learned. The long-term quality and financial performance of an employee health plan is probably only a priority for most corporations when there is a crisis. If you want change, wait for the crisis.

Thank you..

