Title: ChenMed Primary Care Physicians_ The Future for Employer Healthcare__3AgoGzB4ch4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3AgoGzB4ch4
Language: en
Duration: 4:48
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is ChenMed Models the Future for Employers. Now ChenMed is actually a very large primary care group practice that is based in Southeast Florida and they provide primary care, they provide preventive care, they provide care coordination, they do on-site lab and on-site basic imaging like x-rays and ultrasound and they actually provide awesome ChenMed vans that drive people from their homes to the doctor and back. And why in the world would they do this? Why in the world would you have all these awesome services under one roof for primary care? Well listen, they've been doing this for 30 years.

This is not some sort of flash in the pan sort of place. They have 60 practices across the country in Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Virginia. So they are in a lot of places. Now, what makes ChenMed unique and how does this relate to employers? So, they do not own hospitals, okay? They are not a quote unquote facility if you will, but what they are is they're a full risk contractor with Medicare Advantage plans, okay? So they are not the insurance company themselves.

They are not Humana or United or some of these other major insurance carriers that provide Medicare Advantage plans, but they contract with those Medicare Advantage plans and are paid a, listen, this is a sort of dirty word, but it used to be used back in the 90s. They're paid a capitated amount per member that they take care of. And as a result of that, they've been able to be highly successful. Let's look specifically at how they do that, right? They have monthly visits for their members, for their patients.

And they say, we're going to see you every month, whether you're sick or not. Hey, when I had my own primary care clinic, that's what's called a short leash. And I will tell you that is super helpful because there are many times where I wanted to see my patients and they didn't necessarily want to see me. And so if I relied on them to be like the determiner of when they saw me, they, you know, especially if they have diabetes and their sugars could have been like 400 for the last couple of weeks, they would have done nothing.

But because they came in and saw me because they had a scheduled monthly visit, I was able to proactively do something about that. So that sort of short leash, once a month visit approach, that's totally helpful. Next up, the doctor to patient ratio at ChenMed clinics is 450 patients to one doctor. Okay, the national average is five times larger. It is 2,300 patients to one doctor. So they only see like 12 patients in a, ChenMed doctors only see like 12 patients in a day, which is like half the number that like your typical physician sees.

So that smaller panel of patients and the more time that they can spend with them each day, not only allows for those more frequent visits to happen, but allows them to be more effective because when you're not paid fee for services, so notice the key here is the full risk contracting. When you're not paid fee for services to just churn patients, you do things like see fewer patients and take more time. And oh, by the way, that ends up allowing for more preventive care, for decreased overall use of health, healthcare services, for lower overall healthcare costs.

In fact, I'll leave a link in the show notes. They did a study that found these ChenMed patients actually had costs that were 23% lower than similar comparison groups of patients. Okay, so why am I talking about this? This is not Medicare Advantage. This is for people over 65. Like why should employers care about this? And the reason they should care about this is because this is a similar model. Actually what Walmart Health is doing in, not in Dallas, Texas, but in Dallas, Georgia, that new place that they just opened as a pilot that's very similar to what they're doing there, it's similar to what near-site and on-site clinics do.

Because, listen, if you're an employee, especially a self-funded employer, your incentives are essentially the same as the ChenMed incentives. So it's amazing what happens when the incentives are aligned. And when the incentives are aligned, you get the ChenMed model, and that model is really highly applicable for self-funded employers. Now, I want to also say too that ChenMed has grown 35% per year since 2010, and they plan to open 20 new centers in 2020. So not only are they successful, but they're growing like a wee.

And listen, I have no connection with ChenMed whatsoever. I just hope ChenMed starts seeing employer patients. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

