Title: Choosing Wisely_ 5 Questions to Ask Your Doctor_1lcQfbzwZyw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1lcQfbzwZyw
Language: en
Duration: 6:11
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Choosing Wisely and the ABIM Foundation. Now, Choosing Wisely is actually the official name of an initiative by the ABIM Foundation. And ABIM stands for the American Board of Internal Medicine. It is the organization that actually provides me as an internist with board certifications based out of Philadelphia. They have a charitable arm called the Foundation, which has various initiatives. And this is one of them, okay? And it was started in 2012.

And interestingly, it was done to promote conversations between doctors and their patients, or rather between patients and their doctors, so that the patients could choose care more effectively. Okay, so the fact that the ABIM is even doing an initiative to encourage better conversations between patients and doctors is interesting, okay? So this is a patient-focused initiative. All right, next up. Why are they doing this? Because they want those decisions to be more evidence-based. They want those decisions to not duplicate tests or procedures.

They want those decisions to not cause harm. And they want those decisions to not, to be necessary. They want to stop all this unnecessary testing and procedures and medication from happening. Because I'm sure as many of you have heard in the news and read before, so much of healthcare, possibly even a third of it is waste and not needed. And so the ABIM is actually doing something to try to solve that. Now, interestingly, they're doing that through conversations between patients and their doctors. Okay, so they have specific steps that they call the five questions that they think patients need to ask their doctors.

Okay, question number one. Do I really need this test or procedure? Okay, interestingly, the very first question that they want patients to ask actually has to do with necessity. It has to do with need. Do I really need this? Number two. What are the risks? Okay, so the second question gets right to that issue of harm. All right? Not all tests or procedures and medications are risk-free. In fact, the majority of them have some sort of risks. And those need to be weighed. Okay, number three. Are there simpler, safer options? In other words, is there an alternative? Now, notice the two ways that they look at this alternative.

One, simpler. Is it just less complex? A lot of stuff is just really complicated. It requires multiple visits. It requires you to not eat for a while. It requires you to be sedated. I mean, there's a whole bunch of stuff that has to happen. And then all that stuff that needs to happen, it comes with the risk. So is there anything else that's just easier and safer? Okay? Question number four. What happens if I don't do anything? What if I just don't do anything? So the expression for this in medicine is called tincture of time.

The human body is amazing at repairing itself. Our body repairs its own DNA. Our immune system automatically fights bacteria and illnesses and fungus. Okay? It's an amazing thing. Now, it doesn't need help from surgery or from medication. Of course it does. No one's not saying that. But I'll give you a very quick example. Did you know that our immune system ramps up about three to five days after we're infected by a bacteria or a virus to specifically create white blood cells that can attack that specific bacteria or virus? It's called T cell clonal expansion.

It takes three to five days. That means when you start feeling cruddy from like a cold or a mild cough, like it's going to take like three to five days for your immune system to kick in. Okay? So, you know, I'm not saying all the time, but in certain situations, what if we just allow time to pass and tincture of time might help? Okay. Then lastly, how much does it cost? Okay. So, Choosing Wisely directly addresses the issue of costs and that it needs to be addressed between the doctor and the patient. The issue of costs needs to be addressed between the doctor and the patient.

Now, there are voices out there that say, well, the doctor shouldn't even consider costs or that should never even enter into the decision-making process between doctors and patients. And the ABIM Foundation and Choosing Wisely is saying, no, that is wrong, that there absolutely has to be that conversation. And it doesn't happen between the insurance company and the patient. It doesn't happen between some hospital administrator and the patient. It happens between the doctor and the patient. Now, the other things that I find interesting about these five questions in the Choosing Wisely campaign is, is this is essentially patients auditing their doctors.

Okay? Now, I'm not going to get into whether that is or is not a good idea, but this is essentially patients auditing their doctors, which to a certain extent gets into the issue of pride. Are some doctors not going to be wanted, want to be audited or questioned by their patients? Absolutely. There are many doctors out there that will not want to be questioned. Now, I will argue that the better ones that have greater humility would have absolutely no problem with this. Okay? Next up. Okay. So, typical patient visit is around 15 minutes.

Okay. Let's just say you add these questions to your typical patient visit. Let's just say by the time you ask them and the doctor answers them, it's like one minute per question. So, you've added five minutes to that visit. Okay. Well, that means that that visit just went from 15 minutes to 20 minutes, which means that if the doctor was typically seeing four patients an hour at 15 minutes of visit, then now at 20 minutes of visit, they're only seeing three patients an hour. So, that is a 25% decrease in the number of patients that they can see.

And, of course, they're not going to have necessarily all of these conversations with every single patient. But the point is, is that if you're a physician seeing patients, time is money. Like, are we seriously addressing the fact that there's going to be a potentially 25% decrease in physician revenue as a result of these questions? Now, maybe the physician is not explicitly thinking this, but at some point in their conscious or subconscious mind, this is impacting them. So, I wanted to bring these five questions and the Choosing Wisely campaign to your attention.

Like, overall, I think it's a fantastic initiative. And, I thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

