Title: CMMI... Feds as Innovators_ The CMS Medicare Innovation Center Explained_uB9kbKxLKEE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uB9kbKxLKEE
Language: en
Duration: 7:23
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is CMMI, also known as the Feds as Innovators. Now, CMMI is an acronym that stands for the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation. So it is part of CMS. It is the Innovation Center of Medicare and Medicaid for the federal government. Now, what in the world does CMMI do? And oh, by the way, CMMI basically was put into place as a result of the Affordable Care Act where the government was also going to do all of this innovation in the way that Medicare pays in addition to all the other changes that were involved in the ACA.

Okay, so CMMI has come up with 50 Alternative Payment Models or APMs. In other words, an alternative to fee-for-service. Now, back in the early days of the Affordable Care Act, we all heard about ACO this and ACO that, standing for Accountable Care Organization, right? Well, I was scratching my head like you really don't hear much about ACOs anymore. Well, the reason is, is because of these 50 Alternative Payment Models, ACOs are nine. There are nine ACO tracks within the 50. In other words, there's another 41 Alternative Payment Models in addition to the nine different types of ACOs.

Okay, now, I will leave a link in the show notes to the document from CMMI that describes all 50 of these models, but some examples of them are things like Bundled Payment. There are specifically Alternative Payments as it relates to kidney disease because dialysis is a huge cost for Medicare. There's Alternative Payment Models in regards to home health. And the whole reason that this is done is the goal is, is to change physician and hospital and provider behavior from the fee-for-service incentive. In other words, the perverse incentive that says, the more you do, the more you get paid.

Well, shoot, sometimes it's not in the best interest of the patient to do more. But the way that Medicare reimburses right now in a fee-for-service environment, like, that doesn't matter. They're gonna pay more, the more you do. And so, obviously, there are gonna be situations where you absolutely want to do more. But there's many other situations where you do not want to do more, which is where fee-for-service really falls short as a reimbursement method. Okay, so this then begs the question, one, why 50? That seems like an awfully round number.

That seems like a number that was made for a press release. Okay, so that's just kind of odd. One, that's a nice round number. And then two, why so many? That's a lot. So if you're a hospital, you mean to tell me that I have to kind of figure out which of these 50 I'm gonna be involved in? Like, that's a lot of work. So one, it's complicated. Two, there's a lot of choices. And then three, let's talk about how much money is at stake. Okay, now, a hospital brings in 40% of the revenue from Medicare, 40% typically from commercial insurance, 10% from Medicaid, and 10% from self-pay.

All right? Now, 70% of that 40% of Medicare we'll call traditional Medicare. Okay, so, and then another 30% is Medicare Advantage. Okay, then the amount of money that's at stake for all of this is for traditional Medicare. This is not for Medicare Advantage because the commercial insurance plans are the ones that are divvying out the Medicare Advantage payments to the hospital. Okay, so it's just traditional Medicare. Okay, well, the amount of money that's at stake for traditional Medicare is 5%. The hospitals can earn a maximum of a 5% incentive.

Okay, so to figure out the total amount of revenue that's at stake, you have to take 0.4, multiply it by 0.7, and then multiply that by 0.05. Guess what that equals? 1.4% of their total hospital revenue, approximately, is at stake. So, if you're a hospital CFO, and we've always talked about how hospital finance is all about these big buckets because the hospital itself doesn't even know what the individual tests or procedures or services cost, so what are they going to do? Well, they're probably going to go to their commercial insurance folks and be like, okay, well, if we get paid 1.4% less by Medicare or we don't earn an additional 1.4% bonus, like, why don't we just go to this 40% bucket from commercial insurance and just get it from them? And guess what? Like, major hospital systems in the DFW area basically like went to major insurance carriers and said things like, hey, we just need an extra billion dollars in our contract.

Okay? So like, those kinds of conversations exist. Okay? So that begs the question, is this really enough of a motivation to be able to navigate this morass of quote-unquote innovative options to actually change hospital behavior from fee-for-service? And my short answer to that is no. I mean, this has been going on for 10 years. Have we seen dramatic changes in the trajectory of healthcare costs in America? Well, maybe we have, but if anything, it's been in the wrong direction. Okay? So it's too complicated, there's too many choices, and there's too little money to stay.

I am not here to be some critic and not offer alternatives. Here's my alternative. It's capitation. And Medicare has already done this. It did this in the early 1980s when it put in place something called the prospective payment system, which means that for a certain hospitalization for a diagnosis-related group, a DRG, like let's say congestive heart failure, Medicare is only going to pay X number of dollars for that hospital stay regardless of how long that hospital stays. And if the person gets readmitted within a 90-day period after that hospitalization, the hospital gets no more money.

It's essentially capitation and the individual diagnosis and event level. Okay, guess what happened to hospital lengths of stay in the 1980s after they put that in place? They went dramatically down. People used to stay in the hospital for like a month and it went dramatically down. Was there a huge rash of mortality in America in the 80s because of prospective payment? No. So all you gotta do is lengthen the amount of time on the prospective payments lockout period. So instead of 90 days, you can then increase it to 120.

Maybe leave it at that for a year. Then increase it to 150. Then increase it to 180. The hospitals are already used to this kind of setup. Now, I'm not saying this solution is perfect, but it has some alternatives to what they're doing now with APM in that one, one, it's already established. The hospitals are already used to it. They already know how to digest it. And I've already seen hospital behavior change as a result of prospective payment. I already told you about the multidisciplinary rounds that Medicare patients have in the hospital that commercial insurance patients don't have because of prospective payment.

I'll leave a link in the show note to that video. So it's already changed behavior. So that's my point for today. You need to know what CMMI is. You need to know if and how it's working and we need to propose some alternatives. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

