Title: Compare Hospital Prices with Sage Transparency Tool_EYX1gvI9W0M
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EYX1gvI9W0M
Language: en
Duration: 14:35
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Sage Transparency, a hospital pricing transparency tool. That's right, we are going to discuss a relatively new online resource. It's called Sage Transparency. It is the creation of Gloria Satchdev and her team at the Employers Forum of Indiana. Now, in my opinion, Gloria Satchdev is like a national hero. If you're ever feeling down, just go watch one of her videos and it will totally pick you up. So, she is actually a pharmacist by training and Indiana has a problem in that it has very high healthcare costs, specifically from their hospitals.

So, she leads a group of employers in Indiana that are working to create better price transparency. And they did that for the state of Indiana and they did it for the rest of the country as well. And then they created an online tool so that me and you and everybody else can actually look up hospital prices on this website called Sage Transparency. Now, it's on the employer ptp.org website. So, that's Price Transparency Project. So, the employer pricetransparencyproject.org. Or you can just google Sage Transparency Hospital Prices and it will pop up as well.

And then you go into this database. It has a very easy user interface. And the data for this hospital pricing information comes from RAND, the research and development think tank that's out in Santa Monica, California. It comes from hospitals actually posting prices themselves on their websites as dictated by the federal government. Now, of course, there's holes in it, right? Because not all hospitals are compliant with all the prices. But there's still a lot of hospital pricing information from there as well.

Now, when I say hospital prices, what I mean is the allowed amount. So, not billed charges. The allowed amount is the amount that's applied after the discount is applied. So, if billed charges are $10,000 and there's a 50% discount and then the allowed amount would then be $5,000. And that then is the amount that goes to the plan. And then some of it would be divided between the patient out of pocket cost and what the plan itself pays. So, when we talk about hospital prices on this database, we're talking about the actual allowed amount as negotiated by health insurance carriers for commercial insurance plans.

So, this is for employer sponsored plans. What are employers paying after their insurance networks give them their discounts? It is expressed as a percent of Medicare. It does not give you a specific dollar amount. It says, okay, is it 100% of Medicare? In other words, it is the same as Medicare. Is it 150% of Medicare? In other words, it's 1.5% times Medicare. Or 1.5 times Medicare. Is it 200% of Medicare? In other words, it's two times the Medicare rate. That's how SAGE Transparency expresses the pricing. So, interestingly, it does it for 4,000 hospitals across America and it does it for 250 health systems.

So, it's very extensive. So, how would one actually use this? Well, there's various tabs at the top. First, in my opinion, you would go to the clinical tab. And under the clinical tab, you can then look up by state and by specific metro area anywhere in the country. So, because I'm very familiar with the hospitals here in Dallas-Fort Worth, I looked up DFW. And then you can look up by specific hospital. So, three of the major hospital systems within Dallas-Fort Worth are the HCA hospitals, which are Medical City, Baylor, Scott & White, and Texas Health Resources, which is the Presbyterian and Harris Methodist hospitals.

Now, it then goes by specific clinical category. I is imaging, ER is ERO, is orthopedics, CV is cardiovascular outpatient, CVI is cardiovascular inpatient, and GI. It does more than that, but I thought these were the most relevant to employers. Then, it expresses the allowed amounts as a multiple of Medicare or a percentage of Medicare. What I did is instead of saying, so believe it or not, HCA, the average allowed amount across Blue Cross, United, Cigna, Aetna. So, it doesn't pull it out by a specific payer.

It doesn't pull it out by Blue Cross versus United versus Cigna versus Aetna. It averages them across all of those carriers. However, the average across all of those carriers for imaging at 8CA is eight times the Medicare rate. Employers in Dallas-Fort Worth, when their employees get imaging done at an HCA hospital, are paying eight times what Medicare pays. At Baylor, they are paying five times what Medicare pays. At Texas Health Resources Hospital, they are paying six times what Medicare pays. You get the idea.

So, notice, I kind of ranked them here. So, imaging is exorbitant at these hospital systems in Dallas-Fort Worth as it compares to Medicare. Now, let's look at ER services. Interestingly, at HCA, an ER charge is, or an ER price, I should say, the allowed amount, is seven times the Medicare rate. At Baylor, it's two. At THR, they don't list it. Okay? You'll notice these boxes that are empty, that's where the hospital didn't list the price. I would warn you that if that box is empty, that's a warning that it's high.

Okay? If it's low, they'd probably show it. So, anytime you see a box on here, that's actually a warning that there's probably a high price hiding behind that box. Okay, next up. Let's look at orthopedic services. HCA, two times Medicare. Look at this. Empty box for Baylor, empty box for THR. Warning, warning. That means it's likely very high. Likely higher than two times, like it is at HCA. Now, for cardiovascular outpatient, that's largely going to be for cardiac stress tests, maybe echocardiograms as well. You can see it's 1.7 times Medicare, 1.5 times Medicare, 1.8 times Medicare.

Okay. Still a lot more than Medicare, but not nearly the eight to five to seven times multiple as the imaging and the ER services. Next up, we have cardiovascular inpatient. So, these are the much more expensive cardiovascular services. These are things like for your stents and cardiac stents and for your cabbages, and then also for stenting veins as well. But mostly for your, if you have a heart attack or if you're having a cabbage at one of these places. Notice, not listed at all, which means that it's likely a very high multiple of Medicare at these three hospital systems.

So high, they don't want to list it. Okay, next up, for GI procedures, so this is going to be colonoscopies and upper endoscopies. At HCA, it's actually a little less than what Medicare pays. Look at that. You're actually getting a good deal for your EGDs and your colonoscopies at HCA facilities. At Baylor, it's two times the Medicare rate. And at THR facilities, look, blank box, warning, it's likely very high because they didn't list it. Okay, so you can see here that in general, DFW has very high allowed amounts compared to Medicare.

Now let's compare another incredibly large city in America, right? So the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area, the fourth largest metropolitan area in America. Let's go to the third largest metropolitan area in America, Chicago. I didn't do all the hospital systems there, but three of the major academic ones are Northwestern, the University of Chicago, and Rush. Now let's look at here for imaging, again, excruciatingly high compared to Medicare. At Northwestern, four times the Medicare rate. University of Chicago, 4.5 times the Medicare rate.

Rush, four times the Medicare rate. So notice that it's not nearly as exorbitant as in Dallas, but it's still very high compared to Medicare. Next, for ER services, Northwestern, 2.5 times higher than Medicare. UC, twice the size of Medicare. Rush, four times the Medicare rate. Next, let's move on to orthopedic. Northwestern, 2.5. University of Chicago, 2. Rush, 1.4. Isn't that interesting? By reputation, Rush is actually the most well-known, highest reputation hospital in all of Chicagoland when it comes to orthopedic services.

And yet, their allowed amount is actually lower than the University of Chicago and Northwestern. There's a perfect example of where quality and price do not correlate, at least reputational quality, that is. Okay, next up, cardiovascular outpatient. This is super interesting. So again, this is like your stress test, echocardiograms. Northwestern, less than the Medicare rate. It's only 7 tenths the Medicare rate, 0.7. University of Chicago, 1.4 times the Medicare rate. Rush, 1.4 times the Medicare rate. Aha! However, look at Northwestern for cardiovascular inpatient services.

If you get a cardiac cath or a cabbage, if you get cardiovascular services at Northwestern as an inpatient, it's much more expensive. It's 1.8 times the Medicare rate. At University of Chicago, it's only 1 times the Medicare rate. At Rush, it's only 1.2 times the Medicare rate. So in other words, at Northwestern, they make the imaging cheap, but then when they actually have to do a procedure on you, they make it very expensive. Okay, finally, for GI, for colonoscopies and upper endoscopies, 2.5 times the Medicare rate for Northwestern.

Just the Medicare rate for University of Chicago, 1.2 times the Medicare rate for Rush. So what would one do with this? If one is an employer, if one is a broker or a benefit consultant, how would you specifically use this information for an employer? So one, this should be impetus for self-funding. Because if you have a fully insured group of 100 employees or more, there's likely much or all of their premium that's credible, that's based upon their claims experience. And so these high unit costs are directly translating into high premium.

And if you're going to do anything about steering employees away from these incredibly expensive places within your network, then you need to be self-funded in order to, one, have the data, and then, two, actually take action on it to recoup the financial benefit. So I'd say step number one is just to look at these exorbitant rates as they are compared to Medicare and just know that if you're fully insured, you're essentially just writing these hospital systems a blank check. Essentially, what I would say is that your insurance carrier has essentially not negotiated you a good deal at all in terms of things like imaging and ER visits and orthopedic services at your hospital site.

So you can stay fully insured, but just know whatever your insurance carrier tells you as compared to Medicare, they have not negotiated you a good deal. And so you're just going to have to keep writing them a check. So step number one, go self-funded. Step number two is you can actually do what John Toranus at Seragraph did. Because you as an employer can actually incentivize employees on your plan within the network. You as an employer can do that. What did John Toranus at Seragraph do? He said, look, if you stayed away from an egregiously expensive hospital system for a service, I'll give you an extra day of PTO.

You don't even have to pay him money. You don't even have to worry about money going back and forth. He found that the employees actually wanted PTO more than the money. It's really easy for an employer to give an extra day of PTO. What did he do? He said, look, just bring in the EOB. You have to be self-funded because that way you have a PIPA privacy officer within your HR staff so they can actually look at the EOB and you're not breaking any laws. So he would have the employee actually bring an OB, an EOB into HR and be like, look, I got my CT scan or my MRI done.

Not at an egregiously expensive hospital. HR was like, wonderful. Thank you so much for helping our health plan. You get an extra day of PTO. And they would log it into their HRIS system for giving them an extra day of PTO. So what you would do is look in Dallas-Fort Worth, you absolutely have independent imaging options, not HCA, not Baylor and not THR. So you'd essentially say, hey, look, bring me an EOB from an imaging center. Also, an imaging center is not owned by one of these facilities as well. It's kind of tricky, right? Because Baylor and THR secretly own some imaging centers as well.

So you've got to make sure that you don't go to one of those places. OK, so what? So that it's kind of hard to do for ER, right? What are you going to say? Well, if you're having an emergency, I don't necessarily want you to do it for that. So HCA kind of has your hands tied on that one in Dallas-Fort Worth. However, for orthopedic services, are there ambulatory surgery centers that are not associated with HCA Baylor or THR in DFW? Absolutely. Again, giving them days off for it. Now, how would a consumer shop for that? You don't shop for ambulatory surgery centers.

You don't shop for imaging. What you do is you shop for doctors. It's at the doctor choice level. So what you do is, OK, if I have to go into a doctor, then if I choose a doctor that's not associated with HCA Baylor or THR, then if that doctor says, hey, you need imaging, then I can go to an independent imaging center. But if you go to a doctor at HCA Baylor or THR, they're going to do as much as they can to get your imaging done there. So the choice is really at the doctor level. Now, listen, you can't always do that.

In certain situations, for whatever reason, you might want to pick one of these doctors. But just know that if you do and they refer you for imaging, you're going to get shellacked on your imaging charge. OK, next up. Same thing in Chicago at Northwestern. You could do the same thing. You could have PTO days off. There are many independent imaging centers in Chicago that are not affiliated with Northwestern U of C or Rush. Likewise for orthopedic services. OK, so again, I would start with imaging orthopedic services and then maybe even endoscopies like colonoscopies and upper endoscopies as well.

And just you don't have to give them money. But the point is, is that you create a specific incentive program to steer your employees away from egregiously priced hospitals within your network. That is how you can use the SAGE price transparency data to actually lower your health care costs at your company. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare C..

