Title: Consultants Advise on How to Increase Healthcare Costs_syNsMtgaFCQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=syNsMtgaFCQ
Language: en
Duration: 3:19
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is consultants and their role in increasing healthcare costs. Now there was a recent article in the New York Times from November 27th of 2020 about the world's most famous consulting firm, McKinsey, arguably the most elite strategy consulting firm in the world. It turns out that a team of consultants at McKinsey advised Purdue Pharmaceuticals, that's right, the makers of Oxycontin and Oxycodone, of course that everybody is familiar with, they advised Purdue to pay $14,810 for every overdose or new prescription drug addict that could be attributed to Oxycodone and Oxycontin.

And they would pay the $14,810 in the form of a rebate to the distributors of their, in other words, the groups that facilitate the transaction for the payment of the Oxycontin, i.e. folks like CVS and Anthem and others, right? So many of you are familiar with the role that rebates pay from pharmaceutical companies through the distribution channel, i.e. those folks that are doing the transactions and then as a result of those rebates they're trying to basically grease the wheels for more of those prescriptions to be written.

Well Purdue went to the length of saying, hey look if somebody gets an overdose or somebody becomes a new addict then i think we should specifically pay them over 14 grand. Now in a completely separate example, i know the head of strategy at a major Texas hospital system and they were considering a an accountable care organization, they were considering starting their own health plan, they were doing major investigations into taking on risk themselves, right? Which is you know value-based care and that same hospital system hired a very prestigious consulting firm as well which said no you know what you just need to push fee for service and milk fee for service for as long and as hard as you can.

So here's an example of basically accomplices where consultants are acting as accomplices in the increase in health care costs for individuals, employers, and for the government. Now it's really easy to make money in health care, all you have to do is exploit people when they're in a position of desperation. Okay so here you have these bad actors in health care, they are not acting alone and that is my point for today's video. Now are there many consultants that do many important wonderful work within health care? Of course, but the point is is that these consultants can also be enablers of the bad actors who need help to exploit or to carry out to execute their plans.

There's an entire ecosystem around this. This does not happen by accident and that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

