Title: Corporate Head of Benefits - Most Powerful Position in Healthcare for 60_ of Americans_one3_eC7SmY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eC7SmY
Language: en
Duration: 12:21
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Good morning. This is Dr. Eric Bricker, and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the corporate director of benefits, the most important role in employer-sponsored healthcare. Now, if we can do that, let's go on to today's topic. So today's topic about the head of benefits was inspired by this podcast. So there's a podcast, it's relatively new, that's called Broken Benefits that's by Lee Lewis, and that's Lee's picture there on the left. And he interviewed Brian Marcotte, and Brian Marcotte used to be the head of benefits at Honeywell, one of the bastions of industrial corporations here in America.

And it made me think, it is super important to, if we're going to bring change to healthcare in America, change for good, obviously, in terms of improving quality and lowering costs and improving access to care, and even improving the working conditions for doctors and nurses and other healthcare professionals, that really, for employer-sponsored plans, which is the largest source of healthcare financing in America, I shouldn't say that, it's the source of insurance coverage for the most Americans, then we need to understand the most important person of all of employer-sponsored health plans, which is the director or the head of benefits.

And this, and I highly encourage you to go to this Broken Benefits podcast. You can see it on YouTube, or you can get it wherever you get podcasts. Brian Marcotte is a benefits savant. I mean, when I was listening to this, he brought so much positive change to Honeywell. And as I was listening to this, it made me realize how central the head of benefits role is. And let me tell you a little bit about Brian Marcotte. So not only was he the head of benefits at Honeywell for like 20 years, but he then went on to be the CEO and president of the business group on health in Washington, DC for quite a few years after that.

So he's really sort of a central figure in benefits in America. Now at Honeywell, he ran the plan for 150,000 employees, and their plan spend was $500 million a year. It was half a billion dollars a year. And he kept trend flat for seven years at a time when like the healthcare inflation for employers was like at its highest. So when inflation for healthcare spending was at its highest, he kept Honeywell's spend flat. How in the world did he do that? Because he was an expert in navigating the bureaucracy within his own organization.

He set a goal. He had specific high-level strategic goals and tactical goals that he wanted to accomplish. And then he was able to adroitly up-manage the executive team at Honeywell. He was able to build a coalition and he was able to implement change. And this whole podcast with Lee Lewis talks about in detail how exactly he did that. I mean, it is like a blueprint for how to bring positive change to an employee health plan. It is fantastic. And so that really brings me to the central thesis for today's discussion, which is the head of benefits is the linchpin for change in employer-sponsored health plans.

If you don't have the head of benefits on board, it is not going to happen. And I'll give you a specific example of that up front. So Haven, right, with Berkshire Hathaway and Chase and Amazon, they were going to go in and they were going to quote unquote fix healthcare, but they came from outside of the head of benefits. They came from outside of benefits and they sort of, you know, came in through the CEO and the CFO of these large organizations and they've tried to dictate to the head of benefits and it didn't work.

And so essentially, and Atul Gawande, who was the head of Haven, he even said in an interview, sort of a post-mortem of Haven, he's like, what killed Haven was we just couldn't get through the corporate bureaucracies of these places. And it's because they tried to change the healthcare of these organizations without having the linchpin, the head benefits on board. So woe to you if you try to do that. But man, if there is a head of benefits who like is like Brian and is laser focused on positive change for good, then that's where it happens.

So really what are all these people? These are all ninjas of corporate bureaucracy. The commonality across all of these highly successful individuals is that they were one, they were proactive, they were not passive. Two, they were excellent communicators. We do not live in a bubble. We have to be able to communicate our vision and our strategy, but also the tactics as well. So you have, people are not mind readers. So you have to be an excellent communicator. Then thirdly, they were persuasive. If you're going to lead, you have to persuade people.

And to persuade, it requires credibility, it requires consensus building, and it requires being rational. And again, this goes to the ancient Greek approach of persuasion of ethos, which is credibility, pathos, which is empathizing with those you are wanting to persuade. And then finally logos, which is the logic. And it goes in that order. You don't use logic first, you use your credibility first. All of these people intricately understood healthcare. They could talk the talk, right? So a lot of them had a lot of experience, but that woman who only had seven years of experience, she could talk the talk.

She knew very well at a, at a, at a junior level in her, uh, or I should say at a relatively low number of years of experience, she knew how doctors and hospitals operated. She knew how the insurance carriers operated. She knew how claims operated. She knew how the network worked. She knew how discounts worked. So they had credibility because they knew a lot about their job. They were highly competent. Okay. Then two, again, they were great at building consensus. You can't roughshod this. Now you're going to have opposition.

Anytime you're trying to build consensus, you're going to have opposition, but they were able to work through that opposition and make everybody feel hurt. And then lastly, they were able to be rational and logical and, and use data and use stories and anecdotes. It's not one or the other. It's a combination of data and stories. That is the key to the beat to being rational and the logic. Okay. Now then there's the opposite of these people. There are a lot of heads of benefits that I have worked with that are the opposite of these ninjas and I will call them the others.

And so just like the opposite of the ninjas, the others are rather timid. I've, I would, I have seen gobs of timid heads of benefits. They're friendly, but you need to watch out because they tend to be passive aggressive. Next they're quiet. So what's the opposite of being a good communicator? It's not being a bad communicator. It's being a non-communicator. These people were really non-communicators. You really didn't know what they were thinking because they didn't say a whole lot. And so anytime you're meeting with a head of benefits and they are just really quiet, that is a signal that they might be an other and not a ninja.

And then they were not persuasive. They had low credibility because as you would talk to them, you would find out they actually didn't know a lot about how health insurance worked and they didn't know a lot about healthcare work. So they didn't have a lot of credibility because they didn't have a lot of knowledge. They were not a rapport builder. Okay. So yes, they were friendly in a superficial way, but they, they really, and again, part of it is because in order to build rapport, you got to talk. And so yes, they were very polite, but in order to build rapport, you can't be quiet.

And so really these rapport builders, they were, they were again, they were proactive in building relationships with others within their organizations. And lastly, the others, instead of being rational, they tend to not speak in specifics. They tend to speak in a lot of generalities. So again, they didn't have ethos. They didn't have pathos and they didn't have logos. So in other words, what do I mean by speaking, not speak in specifics? They would use a lot of, of, uh, corporate, uh, jargon, right? We all know corporate jargon, circle back outside the box, blah, blah, blah, right? The others would speak that way, but the ninjas would not.

So the benefits in the benefits ninja is the internal champion for positive change. Now, if any of you have gone to business school, you know, about the four P's of a successful business. And those four P's are the product, the price, the placement, and the promotion. And so if you are a broker benefits consultant, if you're a health insurance carrier, if you're a vendor at like compass professional, whatever other type, then you know that these are the four P's that you need to, the four need to thread.

Now the promotion as the internal champion is what the head of benefits does. So you might have a great product. It might be at a great price. The placement is the distribution out to those heads of benefits. It's getting to those heads of benefits, but unless you get the promotion of the head of benefit as a champion within their large organization, you're hosed, you're dead in the water. Okay. Because the head of benefits is the internal promoter. Now this is the Miller Hyman approach to sales, but, but all these kinds of benefits intuitively or objectively knew this, they know that within their organization, there is a technical buyer, there is a use buyer or a user buyer, and there is an economic buyer.

Now the technical buyer is the person that's going to run the day to day of the health insurance plan. So it's going to be their own benefits team. It's going to be the benefits manager. It's going to be the benefit analysts. And so they need to bring them on board. The use buyer is the people and you can't, the employees and their family members. And so you can't go out and literally talk to every single employee, but really the VP of HR is the person whose job it is. Cause remember the V their, their job is to attract and retain the employees.

And so the use buyer is the attract and retain buyer. And they were able to then address the, the concerns and the needs of the use buyer. And then finally, there's the economic buyer. We don't have unlimited resources. We don't have an unlimited budget. The economic buyer is the CEO and the CFO. How much of this is going to cost? How much is this going to cost? You go to any healthcare conference. Um, and all the vendors are like lower healthcare costs, lower healthcare costs, lower healthcare costs, lower healthcare costs.

And your solution can't just be that it has to also address the technical buyer. It's got to be easy to implement. And it also have the employees have to love it. You have to have all three. Okay. If it's just lower healthcare costs, lower healthcare costs, lower healthcare costs, it will not work because you have to allow the head of benefits to address the needs with your solution to each of these three constituents within their organization..

