Title: Cure for Point Solution Burnout_ How Employee Health Plans Should Pick the Right Vendors_Xkhy8KR4A1E
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xkhy8KR4A1E
Language: en
Duration: 15:38
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the cure for point solution burnout. So let me tell you a quick story. So I was recently at the DFWBGH, the Dallas-Fort Worth Business Group on Health Employer Forum, and I was in the exhibition hall. And I love going through exhibition halls and talking to all the people at all the tables, talking to all the vendors. And of course, it was filled with point solutions. And of course, all the employers and broker benefits consultants out there have quote-unquote point solution burnout.

So I'm like, I'm going to talk to these point solution folks and figure out what it is that they're actually talking about and what they actually do. And guess what? They actually provide a lot of value, but that doesn't negate the fact that there's point solution burnout. So the question becomes, okay, like how do you think about these point solutions? Like what's the right way to think about them? And if you think about them the right way, then you can interact with them in a way that does not produce burnout.

So what in the world is a point solution? So a point solution is for employee benefit plans. It's narrow in scope, and it typically addresses like a single health condition. So it might be for a musculoskeletal, like low back pain. It might be for diabetes. It might be for mental health. It might be for substance abuse. You name it, right? But the point is, is that it's narrow in scope. So it addresses like one particular medical condition and it's then sold to an employer or to a health plan to help their health plan members.

Okay. Now the way to think about this is what is referred to as the five whys. Now many of you have probably heard about the five whys before. It's like a quote-unquote consulting technique. But listen, it is not some gimmick. Okay. The five whys is the real deal. It was invented by Sakachi Toyota. Yes, that's right. The founder of Toyota Automotive in the 1930s. It was used to solve the problems at Toyota. Everyone's heard about the Toyota production system. Everyone knows about the high quality and reliability of Toyota cars.

It's because of Sakachi Toyota and the five whys, where the philosophy is, don't just listen to what somebody in a boardroom or a meeting room tells you about the problem. Go see the problem itself. So when you're dealing with a point solution vendor, instead of relying on what people may say in a meeting room about that vendor, go and see at the vendor specifically what in the world is going on there. And when you do that, there are five questions that you specifically, five whys that you specifically need to answer.

Okay. Here we go. Why number one, why does it work? Don't just tell me these outcome statistics, right? All the point solution vendors all have fantastic outcome statistics. And you're like, Oh, you have wonderful outcome statistics. So it must work. The answer is no, you must find out why it works because employers and employee populations are incredibly heterogeneous. So just because they have, I don't think they're not lying about their outcomes, but just because they have these outcomes for other employer groups, that doesn't mean it's going to apply to your group.

And that's what you want to know. Will it apply to your group? So to understand if it will apply to your group, you need to understand why it works. And we're going to use the example of Hinge Health, which is arguably one of the most successful point solution vendors in recent years. Okay. So what Hinge Health is for musculoskeletal problems, it is essentially home-based physical therapy through an app because people have pain in their back and other musculoskeletal pains that go to see an orthopedist. It's super expensive.

They may or may not have back surgery. The back surgery may or may not work. And oftentimes physical therapy will work if it is done correctly. What is done correctly for physical therapy? It means you go to the physical therapist, they teach you how to do physical therapy exercises, but then you actually do them at home. Aha, there's the problem. People don't do their physical therapy training. They don't do their physical therapy exercises at home. So Hinge Health addresses that by saying, look, we have a way to address the problem of people not doing their home PT.

They're not doing their physical therapy exercises at home. And the reason why Hinge Health works is because Hinge Health is actually able to get people to do their physical therapy exercises at home. Okay. So you need to explain why in great detail, right? Next up, why do the employees use it? Like the classic problem of every single point solution out there is low utilization. So all the point solution vendors are like, we have fantastic utilization. They show all their utilization stats. Okay. Again, I don't think they're lying about it.

But the point is, is that that's fine. That's your utilization in aggregate or for other employers. But I need to know specifically for my group, will the employee use it? Why will they use it? You have to get into great detail around the engagement methodology. Okay. So for Hinge Health, and oh, by the way, like I actually signed up for Hinge Health and I actually used Hinge Health through my health plan. So this is not some sort of like anecdotal thing. I went and I saw, I went and I used Hinge Health because I have low back pain.

I go to the gym and I play soccer on the weekends and man, on Monday morning, I can like barely move. Okay. So I had back pain. I'm like, I'm going to use Hinge Health. All right. So what does Hinge do? It sent me text messages. That was, why would I use this? I would use this because Hinge Health sends me a whole bunch of text messages. Now I will tell you for me personally, that didn't work. But the point is, is that you need to understand why people are going to use it and will they actually use it at your employer group, given what their, their answer to this why question is.

Okay. Next up. Why is implementation easy, right? All every single employer and every single broker benefit consultants has been killed by implementations gone wrong. I met with one very large, super large jumbo employer. And he said, show me an implementation and I will show you that it will go wrong. Every single one of our vendors has a 100% track record of a implementation gone wrong. So you can say that implementation is easy. Every single point solution says that implementation is easy, but you have to explain why your implementation is easy.

Like specifically why the contract, why the legal aspects are easy. Is it because your contract is super short and it's highly flexible because corporate attorneys love making adjustments because they have to justify their existence. So corporate attorneys love modifying contracts where you're like, our contract is highly modifiable. Your corporate attorneys want to modify our contract. We love it when corporate attorneys modify our contract and then everybody's happy. Okay. Next up data. If it involves data feed at all, I can guarantee you it will not be easy because if there's anything that every employer hates, it is quote unquote setting up data files and data feeds and getting permission to do that and blah, blah, blah, blah.

To the extent that you don't have to share any data or get any claims data, like that's a good thing. Okay. Next up, you want to literally show them the detailed Gantt chart of the project management plan for the implementation. And during the sales discussion, the sales person, you know, you bring the implementation people along, whatever are able to in detail, articulate how the Gantt chart works, who needs to be involved, what decisions need to be made when, so that you manage the expectations. The reason why implementation is easy is because the vendor has effectively sold the implementation correctly and has not whitewashed it and all like it's easy, blah, blah, blah.

And then it's a total disaster. So you need to explain in detail in advance with a Gantt chart, what decisions need to be made by who and when, so that it's explicitly clear to the employer what they're getting themselves into. Okay. The fourth why, why is it priced this way? You're giving me a price. Classic one is PEPM. Okay. In general, HR people and benefits people, and specifically when they go to their CFO and tell the CFO about their PEPM program, their CFO hates PEPM programs. So you need to explain in detail why your solution is priced this way.

Is it priced on a utilization basis? Is it priced based on a cost plus basis? Is it, and now here's the, here's the kicker. By cost plus, I mean like, Hey, it costs us a hundred thousand dollars to deliver this. We're going to charge you 20% margin on the $100,000. So we're going to charge you $120,000 to deliver this solution because it costs us a hundred thousand dollars to deliver it. Some vendors use that model. Okay. If you're going to do a quote unquote percent of savings model, just know nobody is going to believe it because nobody can wrap their heads around the methodology.

Okay. I'm being facetious. Maybe there's a handful of people out there, but just know that if you think you're going to price it based upon a percent of savings, that is a huge uphill battle that many point solution vendors have died on. Okay. So why is it priced that way? You need to be incredibly clear upfront why it's priced that way. Okay. Finally, the fifth and final why is why now? Why should I, as an employer, do this now? Maybe it's because the employer has a specific mandate from leadership, either from the CHRO or from the executive team in general, to say, look, we need to shake up our benefit plan, or we need to do X, Y, Z about our employee benefit plan.

Okay. That doesn't, it actually doesn't happen very often. So there occasionally is a mandate. Specifically, this will happen if there's like a new head of benefits or a new head of HR, because when they've been brought on, they typically have been brought on because something was wrong with the previous person. And so when they bring somebody on, they're like, look, we're hiring you because we gave you a specific mandate. In fact, they had one of the speakers at the DFWBGH group who was brought on, super experienced gentleman, lots of success in his past.

And they basically needed to shake up benefits at this company. And they gave him a mandate that we want you to shake up benefits at this company. Okay. So executive team mandate. Two, a leadership health problem. So a point solution for cancer is oftentimes purchased by an employer when a member of the executive team or that executive team member's spouse has gone through cancer and has had to deal with cancer. It specifically is when a member on the executive team had spine surgery gone awry. It's when somebody, I specifically worked with a very large employer who the head of benefits spouse had advanced diabetes and a ton of diabetes complications.

And I would say that the spouse's diabetes complications were probably one of the number one reasons why Compass was chosen as the vendor. Okay. So, and again, when I say leader health, also like the head of HR or the head of benefits, like they themselves would want to use the solution or they have a family member. Well, we had another customer whose child, again, it was a back problem, whose child had a congenital malformation of their spine. And so she dealt with tons of doctors and hospitals related to her child's spinal deformity.

And so she wanted to use our services herself for her child's spine issue. That was a huge driver of the purchase decision. Okay. And then lastly, the herd mentality, well, who else is doing this? Because if an employer is found to be outside of the norm of other benefits professionals in the area and other employers in the area, it's like, well, no one wants to be outside of the norm. And so it's like, okay, well, frankly, that's why a lot of people do hinge health. Oh, well, I'm going to do hinge health because other people are doing hinge health.

And so I don't want to offer an employee benefits package to employees that frankly is just outside of the norm. Because the norm involves things like hinge health. Now I will tell you that typically that involves being baked into the carrier and the carrier presents it. And that's a whole nother video for another day. Okay. But ultimately the mandate, the leadership health issue, the herd mentality, what that really is getting down to is job security. Why should the employer do this now? Why should the head of benefits do this now? Why should the head of HR do this now? Because it is going to give you job security.

Now you can't necessarily explicitly have that conversation, but ultimately every single point solution is like save money, save money, save money, save money. That is not the real reason. That's the reason that sounds good, right? In life, there's typically two reasons. There's the reason that sounds good. And then there's the real reason. So typically in employee benefits, the reason that sounds good is lower costs. The real reason is job security for the person in HR. Okay. So just know that when you are going through this as a broker, benefit consultant, or as an HR professional yourself, you should go through these five whys.

And like, you know, you could even stop the vendor upfront and just be like, look, answer these five questions for me. Like don't show me your deck. Don't give me your spiel. Just answer these five questions for me. And then I'll figure out if I actually want to talk to you or not. Okay. Likewise, if you are a salesperson or a marketing person for one of these point solution vendors, you better right up front be able to answer these five questions. And if you do, the point is, is that the point solutions are like tools in a toolbox and they're incredibly useful for different problems.

And so nobody looks at a toolbox filled with wrenches and Phillips head and flathead screw drivers and, you know, Allen wrenches and, and, um, and channel locks and, you know, all sorts of things, right? No one looks at a toolbox and says, Oh, I've got tool burnout. No, that's, that's silly. Okay. The point is, is that you're not burnt out of the tools, but you need to know which specific tool is going to help you for your specific problem. It's not a burnout problem. It's a matching problem. And the sooner and the faster and the more efficiently you can diagnose your problem and the tool that will fix it, i.e.

the point solution that will fix it, the easier it will be. And the more successful you will be. Believe me, I know that there's this head of benefits at this major fortune 500 trucking company. Okay. And he absolutely embraces point solutions and he uses four of them for four key areas that his employees have problems with. And he knows exactly which tools he needs for his employees. And he went out and he found them. Okay. So it wasn't burnout. It was, I got a problem. I need a tool. I need a, I need a Phillips head screwdriver.

And so he went through this process to specifically find the tool to help solve his problems. And so that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare Z..

