Title: Decline of Employer Family Coverage_vYC3TXQOvs8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vYC3TXQOvs8
Language: en
Duration: 5:17
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the decline of employer family coverage. Now many of you are going to be doing renewals and open enrollment and you're going to be looking at employee sentences, you're going to be looking at spreadsheets, and it will have the employee plan choice on there. It'll have, okay, is the coverage for the employee only, oftentimes abbreviated EE. Is it for the employee plus spouse? Is it for the employee plus a dependent? Or is it for the entire family? In other words, the employee, spouse, and an independent.

Now, as you look at all of these spreadsheets, one of the things that struck me, because we would see these spreadsheets all the time too at Compass, was the employers often only pay for the employee premium. And so the employees, they almost always elect, I shouldn't say almost always elect, they frequently elect, just the employee coverage. And if they elect employee plus spouse or employee plus dependent or employee or family coverage, then the employee is having to pay a lot of that out of their paycheck for all that additional coverage.

Because the employer is just paying a lot of the employee only coverage, but not this other stuff. Now what does that mean specifically in terms of numbers for America? So I'm going to go over a lot of numbers now, so stick with me. These are all coming from the Kaiser Family Foundation. So the family premium in 2009 was $13,361. And in the subsequent 10 years, the most recent numbers that we have in 2019, it's up to $20,576. So it's gone up 54%. Now the employee contribution to that full family premium in 2009 was $3,518.

And in 2019, 10 years later, it was $6,015. It went up 71%. Now, if you take the family premium minus the employee contribution, then you're left with what the company is paying, what the employer is paying. And the employer in 2009 was paying $9,843 for family coverage. And then in 2019, 10 years later, they were paying $14,561. So the employer contribution went up 48%. Now let's put these numbers in the context of household income. So household income in 2009 was $62,000. And household income in 2019, 10 years later, was $64,000.

An increase of only 3.2%. And so of course, we've all heard, okay, healthcare costs are rising more than household income or wages. Okay. Now let's specifically look at that number. Let's look at household income minus the employee contribution. So let's take the $62,000 and minus $3,518. That means in 2009, household income after they paid for their health insurance was $58,482. Let's do the same thing for 2019. So you take the $64,000 minus the $6,015 and you get household income after they paid for their health insurance is $57,985.

It went down. Household income after paying for health insurance has gone down by about 1%. So we think about all the booming stock market that has occurred during this time. We think about all of the wealth that has been accumulated during this time. And household income has gone down. Now, how much has household income gone down? Let's take that $500 per household per year and multiply it by the 120 million households that are in America and you get $60 billion. That means that $60 billion a year in wealth is transferred from the households of America to the healthcare system.

It's transferred from households in America to doctors, to hospitals, to insurance companies and PBMs, to pharmaceutical companies and medical device companies, to insurance brokers and benefits consultants. So one would ask ourselves, what kind of value is the average American household getting for their $60 billion a year that they no longer have? And I'm not even talking about the employer wealth transfer from employers to the U.S. healthcare system. I'm just talking about the households. Now, my final point on this is that, listen, both Obama and Trump, both Democrat and Republican presidents and Congresses, were overseeing this.

So, like, as far as I'm concerned, we're losing. We're losing big time. And unless something happens, we're going to keep losing. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

