Title: Demographics that Drive Employee Health_jLlqMgpcUqs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jLlqMgpcUqs
Language: en
Duration: 13:43
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker, and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the demographics that drive employee health. So, a long time ago, I was talking with a big-name benefits consultant, and he was relating this story. He was talking with one of his employer clients, and the employer client asked him, how do we lower our healthcare costs? And sort of facetiously, the benefits consultant said to him, the best way to lower your healthcare costs is to hire healthy employees. Okay, so he kind of said that in a tongue-in-cheek fashion, but let's look at, specifically, what are the demographic characteristics that impact employee health? Now, the very first one is age, and I've done a whole other video that's a deep dive on how age impacts healthcare costs for employers.

But just in brief, the older an employee is, the more their healthcare costs are. So, for family members that are under the age of 18, it's $3,600 per year. For people between the ages of 19 and 44, it's $4,400 a year. And there's a huge jump for 45 to 64-year-olds. It's $8,400 a year. And then if you have any folks over the age of 65 who are still on your employer health plan, then it's $18,400 per year. So, you can see that mostly for the employed age, which is the 19 to 64-year-olds, there's a huge jump once you hit midlife, right? The wheels start coming off, right? Where the folks over 45 are almost twice as much as the folks that are under 45.

But it's more than just age. Number two is education. And I will leave a link in the show notes to this fascinating article from The Atlantic that summarizes research, which has found the number one determinant of life expectancy is education. So, for college-educated people, once they reach the age of 25, then they have a life expectancy up to the age of 84. And if you do not have a college degree, either because you don't have a high school degree or you only have a high school diploma or you only have a little college but not a full college degree, so if you're in any of those categories, your life expectancy is only to the age of 76.

That's right. So, having a college degree literally is associated with eight years of greater longevity. Now, of course, this is not like, it's not like they just teach you in college some magical secret that makes you live for eight years longer, but they found that when they controlled for income and for race and for all other indications that it was still the degree of education that had by far the greatest impact on longevity. In other words, if you didn't have a college degree but you made a lot of money, you still didn't live as long as somebody who did have a college degree but didn't make as much.

Now, this is not just in terms, this impact of education is not just in terms of longevity. It also affects chronic diseases like diabetes. If you have no college degree, you have a 60% higher prevalence, there's a 60% higher prevalence of diabetes versus those that do have a college degree. There is increased cancer mortality if you don't have a college degree. If you don't have a college degree, you have a 47% increased mortality rate in cancer compared to people who do have a college degree. Now, interestingly, the majority of that difference in cancer mortality was due specifically to lung cancer, which gets me to the next point.

And this was really a shocker for me. The number of smokers who are college educated, it's only 8%. Only 8% of college educated people are smokers. However, for non-college educated adults, 26% of them are smokers. Over a quarter! That's 300... So 26 divided by 8 is over three times. There are 325% greater rate of smokers among non-college graduates versus college graduates. So there's tremendously more smokers for non-college graduates, which then is why they have higher rates of lung cancer, which is when they have higher mortality rates.

Now, there's also an association with obesity. So the obesity rate for college graduates is 28%, and the obesity rate for non-college graduates is 40%. And I will tell you anecdotally, in the hospital as a medicine physician, I, of course, would see a lot of seniors, but if I saw people under the age of 65 that were of working age, they typically were either smokers, or they were obese, or both. And a lot of... So I will tell you that absolutely I would see this in the hospital. Like young people, people in their 40s and 50s, who would be hospitalized with you name the condition, and the underlying chronic issues that they had, had a lot to do with smoking and obesity.

Now, right now, I want to tell you, look, I am not pointing fingers and throwing rocks and being judgmental. This is not to be judgmental against people who don't have college degrees. There are many people with college degrees who are very smart. Both of my grandmothers didn't go to college. They were incredibly smart women, okay? So this is not about judging. This is just how it is, okay? It's like saying it's hot in the summer and it's cold in the winter, okay? So we have this phenomena between the association between a college degree and these various impacts on health.

Now, let's look at that connection by industry. So we did this before when we looked at industries and their median age. So for government workers, it's 46. For education, it's 44. For transportation, it's 44. For manufacturing, it's 43. For healthcare, so people who work at hospitals themselves, it's 43. And construction, it's 43. These are the old industries in America. Conversely, retail's much younger. It's 38. And hospitality is even younger than that. It's 33, right? A bunch of young waiters and waitresses working at hotels and restaurants.

Okay, now let's look at the interaction between age, which we said impacts health, and education. So there are 3.8 million non-college educated people who work in education. Now, that's the minority. As you can imagine, the majority of people who work in education actually have a college degree. So if you take the 3.8, you divide it by two, right? Because that's the median age of 44. That means half of the 3.8 million are over the age of four and more likely to have health problems just because they're older.

So you have 1.9 million people who do not have a college degree and are over the age of 44 that work in education. Now, let's do that same math for these other industries. So for transportation, there are 5.1 million non-college educated workers. So if you divide the 5.1 by 2, that means that you have 2.6 million older, in other words, over the age of 44, higher health care costs, and uneducated associated with increased cancer mortality, higher rates of obesity, et cetera. You do the same math for manufacturing, 9.9 million non-college educated workers, which means that there's 5.5 million folks in this higher cost category who are non-college educated.

And for health care, look at this, 7.5 million people without college degrees work in health care, right? It's not the doctors and the nurses, right? Because you typically have to have some sort of degree to do that. But I will tell you, the billing office, and I used to be a hospital billing consultant, the billing office is filled with people who by and large do not have college degrees. The vast majority of the support staff at a hospital do not have college degrees. I will tell you, hospitals are filled with employees who themselves smoke.

Again, I'm not judging them. I'm just saying, look, that's just the reality. That's just how it is, okay? So you're left with 3.75 million folks that are in this category of being older and being non-college educated. And then for construction, you've got 8 million people, and then you've got 4 non-college educated people, and then you have 4 million men that are of that older age group that are non-college educated. So what's my point? Is that, look, especially in transportation, manufacturing, health care, and construction, you have huge swaths of people who are in a demographic intersection of older age and lower levels of education that puts them at much greater risk of severe health problems.

So practically speaking, how do you as an employer use this information? When you are looking at your employee population, you not only want to look at, okay, who are the older people in my employee population, but also who are the non-college educated people in my employee population? And you can look at your own internal HRIS system and job applications, et cetera, et cetera, to be able to get that information. You can also just use zip codes. I'll leave a link in the show notes that by zip code, the Washington Post actually put together average income and average education level attained.

So if you have the home zip codes for your employees, you can estimate their education level as well. And so then what do you do? Well, you just need to send everybody to college and then you'll fix this problem. No, that's impractical. Only about 35% of the U.S. adult population has even graduated from college. But employers that I have seen who have successfully addressed this combination of older age and lower educational attainment, do it through relationship building. You have to have a relationship. You have to care about the person and the person has to care about you before you can do any intervention.

And as I've said before, employers that have large concentrations of employees in a singular location, like for a university or a school system or for a manufacturing plant, they use an on-site clinic or near-site clinic to establish that relationship between the employee or the family member and the clinician. Now, for things like transportation and healthcare and construction, you can't necessarily do that. So this is what I've seen work in these other industries. One, so for transportation, they would actually incorporate it, incorporate the behavior modification or the resources or the engagement, et cetera, through the actual workflow.

In other words, in the warehouse or in the actual semi-truck itself. So there was one employer that I worked with where on their company-issued devices, they would have tiles and they would have a specific tile for various benefits for that person. And it was just part of their workflow because they were using that smartphone for other aspects of their work. And so right, and they could send messages through it. So right there in their workflow, again, this is not done through just some HR random communication.

It was done specifically through their workflow. Likewise, with constructions, again, you have people all over the place. It was done through their management structure. It was done through their boss. And their boss was the conduit through which this information, now you obviously didn't talk about personal medical information with your boss, but that was the conduit through which the relationship with the person was to get them the information about the resources to address their health and their healthcare needs.

Now, interestingly, other two very large industries that have a ton of non-college educated people are retail, which has 12 million non-college educated people, but the average age there is younger. It's only 38. And then for hospitality, they have 11 million non-college educated people, but the average age there is super low. It's 33. But because those numbers are so high, so for retail, a classic example is like Walmart, right? So Walmart is filled with non-college educated people. Again, I'm not judging them.

I'm just saying that's just how it is. And again, there are so many people working in retail that you will still have a very large number of folks who are older, even if the median age is 38. And again, you have to use a non-clinic solution because both retail and hospitality are so spread out. So again, this is not about judging people who have different levels of education. It's just pointing out that a huge driver of health and a huge driver of how an employer should strategically address their employee population is not only age, but the educational status of their employees.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

