Title: Digital Health Sales and Marketing... Stop Wasting Money__uxS_0x-nqY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0x-nqY
Language: en
Duration: 16:22
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is digital health, sales and marketing. Now, I work with a lot of digital health companies and I talk to a lot of digital health companies and I am astounded by actually the fantastic value propositions that many of these digital health companies have. However, there's an issue and that issue is sales and marketing. The sales and marketing in healthcare specifically for digital healthcare companies is actually pretty complicated and it's really important to get it right because if you don't get it right, you will essentially waste all of your time and all of your money.

What do I mean by waste all of your time and all of your money? So, digital health funding has gone through the roof. So the biggest year by far was the most recent year of 2021 where there was literally $29 billion of investment in digital health startups and companies. Now, that was in 729 deals. For comparison's sake, in the previous year, 2020, there was only $15 billion for 484 deals. So, $15 billion to $29 billion, it almost doubled in a year. And if you go back 10 years to 2011, it was only $1.2 billion of investment in digital health companies for 94 deals.

So, look. In 10 years, it's gone from $1.2 billion to $29 billion. If you add up all the years in between, and I'll leave a link in the show notes to the Rock Health source of this data, it's fantastic. If you add up all the money that has been invested between 2011 and 2021, it adds up to $85.6 billion that has been invested in digital health companies. Now, one might argue that individual patients have not necessarily reaped the benefits of this $85.6 billion of investment. Because that's ultimately the point, right? The reason I'm doing this is to help patients.

Like, I'm not doing this to like, I don't know, twiddle my thumbs. Like, the point is that you can ultimately improve people's lives through the solutions that many of these digital health companies are offering. So, one might argue, have patients' lives really been improved to equate to the $85.6 billion that has been spent? I mean, just to put that in terms of, let's say you didn't spend the $85.6 billion on digital health companies. Let's just say you spent it on insulin. And it's like $5,200 per person per year in terms of insulin costs for somebody that's got diabetes.

Okay, that literally means that for this $85.6 billion, you could have supplied the insulin for 1.5 million people over the course of this 10-year period of time. So, you're like, okay, well, maybe to like help people, instead of investing the $85 billion in digital health companies, maybe we should have just paid for everybody's insulin for 1.5 million people. That would have been a much better use of the money. Maybe. Maybe. But the point is, is that let's not waste digital health investment just because we don't get the sales and marketing right.

So, let's talk about what I've seen work, not only within my own digital health companies that I've worked with, and I've worked in three now, and what I've seen with other successful digital health companies. And that relates to, obviously, you've got to talk about the sales and marketing funnel. And, what I have here is actually three funnels. Because part of the problem is, is that sales and marketing in digital health isn't just one funnel. It's actually three. Now, what you have here is a marketing and sales funnel for employers.

You have a marketing and sales funnel for brokers, consultants, and insurance carriers. And then you have a marketing and sales funnel actually for the members themselves. Because once you enact or implement the solution, that doesn't mean there's adoption. In fact, utilization historically for digital health solutions is super low. And so, if you do these first two funnels and sell the deal, but forget about this last funnel with the end patient, the end member, then you're totally hosed. So, let's go through each of these three funnels.

Now, at the top of the funnel is actually the marketing. So, it's not the sales and marketing funnel. It's actually the marketing and sales funnel, right? And what is marketing? Marketing is getting people's attention. Because you can't sell somebody anything until you get their attention. And getting people's attention takes two forms. It always takes two forms. There's inbound and outbound. So, inbound marketing is essentially content marketing where you create information that is educational and or entertaining that people will then find to then be educated about your product or service.

And then there's outbound marketing, which is interruption-based marketing. And that can be advertising. That can be emails. That can be text messages. That can be, you know, a booth at a conference. There can be all sorts of ways that you're, that can also be cold calling using the phone, right? So, phone, email, also messaging people through LinkedIn, conferences, et cetera. So, you've got these two areas, okay? Now, one's not better than the other. They're complimentary. And you got to do both. Now, once that gets you into the sales funnel, and it's super important that when you're selling, and this is the Miller-Hyman approach, which I have seen firsthand time and time again, which is you're not just making one sale.

You're actually making three sales to three buyers for each individual customer. And those three buyers are the technical buyer, the outcome buyer, and the financial buyer. Now, the technical buyer is the person who has to interact and use this thing on a frequent basis. Typically, that's going to be the benefits manager or the benefits director at the employer. They've got to interact with your solution. You've got to sell that interaction. You're going to make their life easier, not harder. You're going to make them look good so that they get a promotion, not cause them risk in their jobs so that they get fired, okay? Then there's the outcome, okay? Like, so arguably for an employer-sponsored health plan, like the whole point of employee benefits is to attract and retain employees.

So can you actually achieve the outcome of attracting and retaining employees, whether it be through just a better benefits package or healthier employees or, you know, all sorts of things, right? To be able to attract and retain those employees. Like, that's really the VP of HR who's like looking to make that happen. And then there is the economic or the financial buyer, which obviously healthcare costs are super high. It's oftentimes the company's second largest expense after payroll. So those are people within the C-suite, typically the CEO and the CFO that are the financial buyers, okay? So you've got to make all that happen in order to get a buy decision.

And you're like, okay, great. And we're done. No. That's only one of the three funnels. You've got the whole funnel over here related to the broker, consultant, and the insurance carrier. Because really, there is an ecosystem. There's an employee benefits, employer-sponsored healthcare ecosystem. And if you think you're just going to win by getting these folks on board, the employer, without getting their broker, consultant, and the carrier on board, then I've seen that fail over and over again. You've got to win over the ecosystem.

And that involves, guess what? Getting the attention of the ecosystem through marketing, through inbound marketing and outbound marketing to the ecosystem of brokers, consultants, and carriers. Next, you then have the analogous technical buyer, outcome buyer, and financial buyer, per the Miller-Hyman methodology, at the broker, consultant, and carrier. Now, what are the analogous positions in those areas? Okay, so the technical buyer is like the account manager. Because they've got to interact with your product or solution to make it happen.

You have to make their job easier. You have to make them look good so they can get promoted, right? Then you have the, really, I would say then, the outcome buyer oftentimes is the SME, or the subject matter expert within the brokerage, within the consulting firm, within the carrier. What is the SME? So, it might be the head of population health. It might be the head of analytics. So, there's typically some sort of strategic area within their benefits that they have oftentimes made to these brokerage and consulting firms.

They have sort of a department that is responsible for that. Again, oftentimes is analytics or cost containment or population health. There could even be wellness. It could be well-being. It's all sorts of stuff. So, you've got to make them, you have to be like, look, we offer consulting services that achieve the whole reason that me as a SME exists. And then finally, there's the financial buyer, which is actually the producer or the end consultant or the people with financial responsibility at the carrier, whether it be sales or the CFO at the carrier.

Because you want to then increase the income for this organization. Not necessarily by extracting more dollars from each employer, but maybe you add value to this organization by increasing their sales. Maybe by your digital health solution being integrated with, embedded with, exclusively offered with, XYZ broker, consultant, carrier, then they're able to go out to the marketplace and they're able to win more customers. And therefore, you're a value to the producer. You're a value to the sales team. You're a value to the CFO because you're helping them win business.

So, you can't just be like, oh, hey, we're this awesome digital health solution that improves patients' lives and improves members' lives. Yes, you need to do that. But that is not enough. You need to answer the question, why is the broker consulting firm carrier financially interested in promoting your product in the first place? And if you can't answer that question, there is a high likelihood that you will not be promoted. Listen, we live in a pragmatic world. I'm not here to be cynical. I'm just here to be pragmatic.

These people have kids they need to send through college as well. They're thinking about that. Now, finally, so here you're not getting a buy. You're getting a buy-in. Okay, so you need to get a buy. And then you also need to get a buy-in. And then I have engagement here, which is essentially the marketing and sales to the end user, to the employee, the plan member, right? So this is where we talk about, okay, well, digital health is actually B2B2C, right? So it's B2B, you, the business, as the digital health company, to the business, i.e.

the employer, to the business, i.e. the broker, consultant, carrier. But then it's to the end customer is the actual plan member that you're supporting. And you have to recognize that that in and of itself is its own sales and marketing funnel, where you have to do inbound and outbound marketing to the end consumer, where you have to do whether it be through. Now, inbound marketing is where, okay, the person has a problem, and the member has a problem, and they're out looking for a solution. And so what do they do? They might call customer service at the carrier.

So maybe your solution is embedded into customer service at the carrier. Or maybe this is what we did at Compass. We were the health navigation solution. We intentionally fixed people's problem medical bills, gave people comparative pricing information, scheduled appointments for them, so that as people encounter these pain points within the healthcare system, they're like, could you help me with this? And we wanted to be like nine times out of ten the answer of, yes, we can help you with this. Because we want to be the, whenever you're contacting us, we want to say, yes, we can help you.

And oh, by the way, here's some other ways we can help you as well. And then finally, you also need to do interruption-based marketing. Now, you can't just do it and be like, oh, we'll just email all the employees. That's interruption-based marketing. We'll just email all the employees, and then we're done. No, that's not enough. That's part of it. Listen, maybe you need to text them. Maybe you need to call them. Maybe you need to talk to them during open enrollment. Maybe you need to engage them with an app. Maybe you need to engage them through social media.

It's never one of these things. It's typically a combination of these things. Because know that when you're engaging an employee population, that that employee population is very heterogeneous. You've got millennials. You've got Gen Xers. You've got baby boomers. You've got men. You've got women. That's six personas right there that you need to address. And these people like to be addressed not only with different content, but in different ways. Are you going to be able to talk to a millennial on the phone? Probably not.

They don't really talk on the phone. Are you going to be able to have a lot of, you know, chat and text messaging with a baby boomer? Yes, some, but not a lot. They're more likely to talk on the phone, right? So, and then finally, you're like, okay, great. I'm getting their attention, educating them, inbound, outbound, market. There literally is a sales process for the individual plan members as well, where typically there's not like an out-of-pocket cost for the member, whether it's like using your digital health tool or using your point solution or whatever it is.

Oftentimes that's at zero cost to them. But you need to sell them because they still have to invest their time. They have to invest their attention into like learning how to use your digital health solution, whatever thingamabobber it is. So how do you do that? Who do you need to sell to? You need to sell to the peers within the organization. In other words, the early adopters, right? Because everybody has the technology adoption lifecycle. And so there are early adopters within the employee population who are going to be the first people to use a digital health solution.

And you not only need to identify and sell to them, but then you need to encourage them to then sell to the early adopters, excuse me, the pragmatists and the conservative employees. Because you yourself at the digital health company, you're not going to convince a conservative employee to use your digital health service. Their co-worker is going to sell them on using your digital health service. Their early adopter co-worker who they look up to or who they're friends with, etc., they're the ones who are going to convince them, not you.

Your job is to get the early adopters and the pragmatists on board, and then the early adopters and the pragmatists get the conservatives on board. Okay, so fine. And then also through management. At the end of the day, businesses, then they say, oh, we're a flat organization, yada, yada, yada. Listen, all businesses have a hierarchy because all human organizations have a hierarchy. Like, you can say that hierarchy is right or wrong, but listen, that's the way it is. So do you communicate out to the management? Have you sold the management? If they're hearing about this from their fellow employees, but their boss doesn't talk about this at all, they need to hear it from multiple places.

They need to hear about it from their fellow employees and from their boss, and from their boss's boss, and from their boss's boss's boss. Listen, when we have done videos by the CEO or by regional managers or divisional leaders, etc., they go out to the employees, that's super helpful to be like, look, this is the CEO of the company that's talking about XYZ digital health solution. You can't do that in every company, but when you can engage the management and sell, so that's hugely helpful in the sales pipeline.

So there you have it. Digital health, sales, and marketing. Three funnels. You must master all three of them in order to be successful so we can stop wasting time and money. I mean, let's roll up our sleeves and get this done, America. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

