Title: Direct Primary Care Overview_nu28AEnIom8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nu28AEnIom8
Language: en
Duration: 6:22
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is direct primary care. Now we cannot have a video series about healthcare finance and not talk about direct primary care. Many of you are already familiar with it but I want to go through some key statistics. First off it is membership fee medicine. Typically the direct primary care physician will charge anywhere from $10 to $100 per month per patient. Typically kids are toward the lower end of like $10-$15 and grown-ups are towards the higher end.

So for a family you're talking anywhere from like $150 to $250 per month. Now there is typically then no visit fee. In other words it's not fee for service. You're paying a membership and you're getting unlimited use and you're not paying a fee. You the patient are not paying a fee at all when you're going to that primary care physician. Now it started back in around 2010 with some entrepreneurial sort of forward-thinking physicians in places like Seattle and Kansas and today there's about 1,200 practices. The vast majority of these practices are single physicians so there's about 1,200 direct primary care physicians.

They're typically family practice. I'd say anecdotally what I've seen is probably the majority of them are family practice also general internal medicine and occasionally you'll see pediatric direct primary care physicians as well. Now let's put those 1,200 direct primary care physicians into context. There are 141,000 family practice doctors in America and there's about 200,000 internal medicine doctors in America. Now a lot of those internal medicine doctors are only hospital based so they don't necessarily practice primary care but let's just take the 141,000 family practice doctors.

Okay well 1,200 divided by 141,000 that means that only 0.85 percent of all family practice doctors work in a direct primary care setting. So it's really incredibly in its infancy. Okay now 72 percent of these direct primary care practices have only been open for three to five years so if they started in 2010 the vast majority of them are really between 2015 and 2017 when they started so it's really new. And only 18 percent have been around for greater than five years. Here's the key. Here's really the secret to the direct primary care practice.

It's the patient panel where the average DPC practice has 345 patients in their panel. In other words in total that they take care of. Now the goal of a like a quote-unquote full DPC practice is about 600 patients. Now let's compare that to your typical panel for a primary care physician which is 2,500. Which means that if you're working the same number of clinic hours a week that's only 20 percent of the patient volume. Which means you're spending five times more with each patient and it's that time. That's the key to the success for higher quality, more cost-effective, care.

Because it's this time that enables the primary care physician essentially to carry out that third generation patient-centered medical home from Dr. Brent James out at Intermountain Healthcare. I'll leave a link in the show notes to that. But that's where Intermountain has already proven this model. Where you have primary care with disease management, with behavioral health, mental health, and with healthcare system care coordination or navigation. Those are the three generations that you put together. And those three things are what primary care physicians do all day long.

Longitudinal disease management, mental and behavioral health, health system navigation. That's like that is part and parcel. That is their expertise. And it gives them the time to do it. So note that if you have primary care without DPC that almost de facto the primary care doctor does not have the time to do the things that they should be doing. Now the way that these DPC physicians communicate is also fantastic. It's in-person patient visits. They do the telehealth as well. You don't even need a separate telehealth vendor.

It's also email and text. How do people communicate? By email and text. And that's how they communicate with their doctors as well. Now 57% of DPC practices contract with employers. In other words that membership fee is either partially or totally paid by the employer. Because there's so much value that's being created for an employee health plan and so much savings for the employer. That of course you're helping the patient and the patient themselves might want to pay for the service. But it behooves the employer to pay for it.

Because the DPC doc is providing so much value to the plan to the employer. Now where is the best fit for DPC practices? They are not for all employers. And I'll leave a link in the show notes to there's a Dr. Thomas who started DPC in the Detroit area from Health Rosetta from a number of other fantastic resources that talk about these dynamics. One, the health presented folks look and say employers that have low turnover and have highly concentrated employees. They are the best fit for DPCs. If you have a diverse geographically spread out.

Obviously they can't get into the doctor's office because they are all over the place. But if they are located in one area then they can get into the doctor's office. What does that mean? Municipalities. Manufacturing. Where there's like a single factory location. School systems. These are like the ideal settings for DPCs. And it's really an alternative to the near site or the on site model. And it's month to month. And that's the great thing is you don't have this huge upfront cost that you might have. Upfront fixed cost with on site or near site clinic.

Is that it's incredibly flexible. So that the employer is paying the DPC fee as their employer's employee population size. As it grows and shrinks. Then the DPC clinic scales right along with it. So this only scratches the surface of direct primary care. But if we work in health care finance we have to know about DPC. And thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

