Title: Doctor Burnout_  Just Too Much Work__SiPNg76ZZF0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SiPNg76ZZF0
Language: en
Duration: 4:34
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Doctors are getting burned out and in record numbers. But do you know which practices are most susceptible to stress and overwork? Stay tuned as I take a look at mental health in the medical profession. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker and I'm also a healthcare finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially and that's why I've partnered with Nomi Health to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. COVID really opened a lot of people's eyes to the real issue of physician burnout. But as anyone who has been in healthcare for a while knows, doctor burnout was an issue long before the pandemic.

First of all, we should preface this by defining what burnout is. It's not a medical definition per se, but according to many trusted sources, including the Mayo Clinic, burnout is real and job burnout can affect your physical and mental health. So, what's causing all these doctors to be burning out? Here's one novel take on it. Maybe it's caused by just too much damn work. A survey of 13,000 doctors in various specialties in 2021 during the peak of COVID asked about burnout. Not surprisingly, emergency medicine was the highest with 60% of doctors feeling burned out.

Critical care was the second highest at 56%. At the opposite end, dermatology had the lowest burnout rate at 33% and orthopedics was at 37%. Why the difference? Well, it may seem pretty obvious, but back in 2021 when COVID was raging, ER and critical care doctors were on the front lines of this unprecedented global health calamity. Slammed with patients. Every doctor knows what it's like to get slammed. It's awful. There's too much to do in too little time. Not seeing the patients because there are just too many of them is not an option, when the consequences of not getting all the work done might be literally life or death.

The stakes are tremendously high. It's incredibly stressful. Now, what may not be so obvious is why dermatology and orthopedics had such low burnout rates during this period. During COVID, patient volume to outpatient specialties like dermatology went down by over 50% and orthopedic surgeries went down by 23%. Remember how there was so much reporting about people pushing off optional procedures during COVID? There was simply less work for these specialists to do compared to their ER and critical care peers.

So, the conclusion is fairly obvious. Too much work leads to greater incidences of burnout. Does decreasing the work for physicians by adding nurse practitioners, physicians assistants, nurses, and medical technicians help? You bet it does. Now, here's an example. A study at Stanford University found that burnout for primary care physicians decreased after 16 months when a team-based approach using a variety of clinicians cared for patients. However, because of budget cuts, the team-based support later had to be decreased.

And when that happened, the physician burnout went back up because the doctors had to take over the time to do the time. And the doctors had to take over the time. And the doctors had to take over the time. And the doctors had to take over the time. And the doctors had to take over the time. Look, there's only so much work that any person can do. If healthcare administrators want to start addressing doctor burnout and improve mental health, they need to allocate more resources to alleviating the doctor workload.

It's plain and simple. Want to reduce churn and keep vacancies low? Start by making doctor mental health a guiding principle for your organization. Want to have doctors that are making the best care decisions possible? Well, how about make sure they aren't burned out? It's not just the right thing to do. Managing for physician mental health is good business. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and this is Healthcare Uncovered, where we break down a broken system. Lancashore, and Callerron Tom, who's MMA class Edgy Farr, has in מחic of Micro K worshi션, Mmonthica Kôni.

Same proposition for lighting mental health? I mean, you can see if you haven't reagid is really not able to 달ise Human-phiscopor Soles almost or even to improve, they can't use the perception of the performance of yeter-lexis. kaneri.

