Title: Doctor Specialties That Have Power at Hospital Systems_Up-tWELClwo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Up-tWELClwo
Language: en
Duration: 8:21
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is who has power at hospital systems. Now let me tell you a little story. So I was recently approached by a recruiter to be the chief medical officer of value-based care at one of the top 20 largest hospital systems in America. Now I'm not saying this to be like, oh, you know, blah, blah, blah, bragging, etc. Like there's like a 99% chance I would have never gotten the job anyway, even if I wanted it. But I said to her, I'm like, look, the job is not for me.

Because when I was thinking about it, it's like what in the world would the chief medical officer of value-based care be able to do at a major hospital system? Because it comes down to, okay, who's got power at the hospital system? And I'll tell you what, right now it is not the chief medical officer of value-based care. That is for sure. So who does have power? Okay, the administration has a very symbiotic relationship with specific groups of physicians, specific types of physicians. Not all physicians.

It's specifically the orthopedic surgeons, the neurosurgeons that do spine surgery, the cardiologists, and the oncologist. Why is that? It's because these are the specific specialties that drive high margin services at the hospital system. Why is that? Because they do complex surgery, orthopedics, neurospine, cardiologists is for the cath lab and pacemakers, ICDs, and the stress tests. And then oncologists is for the inpatient chemo to commercially insured patients. So if you can do expensive stuff to commercially insured patients, that drives all the high margin revenue at the hospital system.

That's it. That's how hospitals grow. That's how they make money. It's just with these folks up here. So the administration at the hospital treats these physicians like royalty. They will do anything they can to attract them. They will do anything they can to keep them. And that's why they give them ambulatory surgery centers that are quote-unquote co-owned between themselves and these different specialists so that they can give these specialists a kind of facility fees. They want to give them even more money. They want to give them some of the facility money to keep them there and happy.

Okay. Like I said, what's driving this are the knee surgeries, the hip surgeries, the spine surgeries, specifically cervical spine and lumbar spine. Again, the cardiac cath lab and the electrophysiology lab for putting in pacemakers and ICDs. Okay. Again, it's the stress tests as well, specifically the nuclear stress tests. And it's also the inpatient chemo. Okay. Now, what's sort of the next tier down who the administration has cozied up to? Okay. EMT, ear, nose, and throat, because they do some surgeries, but there's not like this huge swath of sinus surgeries going on out there.

Okay. Urology. Now, of course, they're doing mostly surgery on the prostate and kidneys. That's mostly a Medicare population that they're doing it on, so they don't pay as well as the commercially insured folks. Vascular surgery is putting in stents in the peripheral vasculature of the legs. Again, it's a lot of the Medicare population, so again, it's not a great payer vis-a-vis commercial insurance. And then Opto, they're doing a lot of outpatient surgery in the hospital, but again, it's a lot of cataract stuff and retina stuff.

Again, on a Medicare population, not the best payer in the world. I'll even put OB-GYN there as kind of the middle, because for labor and delivery, like half the babies in America, almost half the babies in America, and their moms are on Medicaid, which is a really bad payer. So they're not really bringing in a lot of, you know, they're probably losing money on their Medicaid deliveries. And yet, they're doing some, like, hysterectomies and stuff. Again, that's major, it's typically Medicare age people. Maybe they're doing some ovarian cyst surgeries on people with commercial insurance.

So they're kind of in the middle. They're not driving huge margins like the folks on top. So they're kind of in the middle. And then the bottom of the barrel, who, like, the hospital system, like, these types of physicians hold no sway in a hospital system. Okay. Psychiatry, if the hospital even has an inpatient psych ward, that thing loses money like crazy, because most of the people either don't have insurance at all, or they're on Medicaid. Okay. Primary care physicians, they don't hold any sway. ER physicians, they don't hold any sway, because a lot of the PCPs and ER doctors, they can be replaced.

Radiologists, too. So, yeah, they contract with a radiology group, but at the end of the day, they could always contract with a different radiology group as well. So they can kind of be replaced. So they don't really hold a lot of sway. Okay. So there's kind of a hierarchy. And it's really these orthopedic, neurospine, cars, oncology. They're the ones that drive all the high margin patient flow through a hospital. Okay. Now, so again, there's this fee-for-service symbiotic relationship. So why would I not accept the position as the chief medical officer of value-based care at a hospital? Because value-based care, by definition, is a betrayal of these physicians up top.

It's a betrayal of orthopedic, neurospine, cardiology, oncology. Because what does it do? It will suck patient volume and procedure volume away from all these guys, and they will be fighting mad. Like, they will either leave, or I will tell you, there's a major hospital system in the South who wants to move in the direction of value-based care. You know what they did with these folks? They put them on salary, and they paid them more than they were currently making under a fee-for-service. To do less. To do less knee procedures.

To do less spine procedures. To do less cardiac procedures. To do less inpatient chemo. They paid them more to do less. And that's the only way I've seen so far to make it work. You have to pay these guys off. Sorry to be so direct about it. Because if you don't pay them more than they're already making with fee-for-service, they're going to leave. Okay. So, in value-based care, the reason why you're going to decrease patient volumes and procedure volumes for orthopedic, or spine, is because the primary care physicians are going to refer a lot more people to physical therapy, use conservative means, and do a lot less imaging.

And this already played out with the third generation patient-centered medical home at Intermountain Health. Guess what? They did a lot less imaging, and they did a lot less ortho and neurospine procedures because of that. Next up. Cardiology. You're going to have a lot less cardiology cath lab procedures, and you're going to have a lot less cardiology stress tests, because there's going to be a lot less ER visits in a scenario with value-based care, because cardiologists love hanging out in ERs. That's where they get them.

So, most people actually don't, quote-unquote, make appointments with cardiologists. They have some sort of emergency, where they go into the emergency room. Typically, it's some sort of nonspecific symptom, shortness of breath, maybe some chest pain. And they end up getting seen by the cardiologist. That's where they get referred into. That's where these commercial folks get referred into the cardiologist. It's going to the ER. So, if you actually have more access to more primary care physicians, it keeps people out of the ER.

And if it keeps people out of the ER, it keeps them out of the cardiologist's office. So, their volumes of commercially insured folks are going to go way down. Guess what happened at Intermountain Health? ER visits went way down. Okay. Finally, with oncologists, with diabetes care, you're going to be doing more screening. And specifically, that means you're going to be catching a lot more for breast cancer. You're going to be catching a lot more ductal carcinoma in situ, DCIS. Yes. Okay. So, not stage 1, 2, 3, or 4 breast cancer.

Like, ductal carcinoma in situ is still a very localized disease. People with, women with ductal carcinoma in situ don't require chemo. So, there goes their high margin chemo. They don't need it if they're caught with ductal carcinoma in situ. Also, with the colon cancer, if everyone got their colonoscopies and they got their colon polyps removed, those are precancerous lesions, they're not going to show up with stage 1, 2, 3, or 4 colon cancer. Which requires chemo. Because the precancer's pop is going to be removed.

So, of course, it doesn't take it down to zero. But essentially, value-based care at a hospital system is a betrayal of the specialists that built the hospital system to begin with. And understandably so, the vast majority of hospitals in America are unwilling to do that. And that's the point I wanted to make today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

