Title: Doctor Appointment Availability by Specialty and City in America_m1mzgMv1i9Y
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m1mzgMv1i9Y
Language: en
Duration: 8:16
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is doctor appointment wait times by specialty and by city across America. So, as many of you know, a lot of doctors left the practice of medicines since the COVID pandemic. In fact, 71,000 doctors have left the practice of medicine, which is 7% of all doctors. So, making an appointment these days is just hard to do. Anecdotally, I'm sure you've experienced that yourself or you've had friends or colleagues or family members that have said the same thing.

So, making an appointment, the sort of fancy term for making an appointment within health care policy circles is called access. Okay, so just accessing health care is super important because we can talk about cost, we can talk about quality, but if you can't even get in the door to get health care services, then it doesn't matter. The cost and the quality don't matter if you can't even be seen. So, today we're going to talk about patient wait times and access. Now, there's this fantastic study that was done by ECG Management Consultants, which is actually a subsidiary of Siemens, the big multinational company.

And this first came to my attention from the Becker's Healthcare Newsletter. So, I have no connection with Becker's, but it's a fantastic source. So, really, congratulations for them for pointing out this ECG Management Consultant study. And congratulations to ECG Management Consultants for putting together fantastic research. So, they did a survey of 3,712 practices across America trying to make an appointment by phone in many different states for many different specialties. And sort of the standard is, is that really a lot of hospitals say, are like, okay, we like to get a patient's end within 14 days between when they call and when their appointment actually is.

Okay. So, fine. And then another sort of standard for access is that they don't ask for the first or second available. Well, they ask for what's called the third available appointment because sometimes you can get erroneously low wait times for appointments because they're like, oh, yeah, you can be seen this afternoon because we had a cancellation. So, it's really like how far out are they booking for like open spots in their schedule, not just because somebody randomly canceled. Okay. So, the average wait time in America for all specialties is 38 days.

Okay. So, more than twice what the goal is of less than 24 days. All right. Oh, by the way, when they were calling these 3,712 practices, 20% of the time, they couldn't even figure it out. They couldn't even find out when the next available appointment was because it was a phone tree that ended at a dead end because they left a message and they never got a call back. Okay. So, just know that if you yourself are trying to schedule an appointment, that like one out of five times when you try to schedule an appointment, like you're not even going to be able to get an answer.

Okay. That's how hard it is to get an appointment. One out of five times, like you can't even get an answer because you can't even get through. Okay. So, fine. So, now let's look at the average wait time by specialty. Now, oh, before we do that though, for that average wait time of 38 days, as you can imagine, it was actually a pretty wide distribution for each particular specialties. For each particular metropolitan area. In other words, there was like, so for example, if you were trying to find a neurologist in Phoenix, then you could be seen within seven days or on the high end, it would, some, uh, one practice, it was 290 days.

It was 10 months. Okay. So, for one practice, it was a week for another practice. It was 10 months. So, there was pretty wide distribution, uh, around that average number. It wasn't super narrow, right? So, it was a really wide bell-shaped curve, if you will. Okay. Now, let's look at it by specialty. So, the type of doctor that was the easiest to make an appointment with was an orthopedic surgeon. You could make an appointment with an orthopedic surgeon on average within 20 days in America. And now we're going to go an increasing number of days.

General surgery, 22 days. So, orthopedic surgery, general surgery, were some of the easiest doctors to make appointments with. Next, pediatrics at 24 days. Next, family practice at 29 days. Isn't that interesting? So, here we are on A Healthcare Z and many other places, uh, across the internet saying, you should use primary care first. And all of you are like, uh, it's super hard to make an appointment with a primary care physician like a family practice doctor. It's a month. But I could be seen by an orthopedist for my joint pain or my back pain in less time.

So, you tell me I should use primary care, and yet it's easier to see the orthopedist. That's an important problem to solve. That's another topic for another day. But that is an incredibly important topic that every, like, rational patient brings up to me. Okay, next up. OBGYN, 37 days to make an appointment. Cardiologist, 39. Dermatologist. Dermatologist, notoriously hard to make an appointment with. That's been going on for decades. 40 days. Look at this. Gastroenterology, 48 days. And the highest ones are neurology and rheumatology at greater than 60 days.

It takes more than two months to get in the door with a rheumatologist or a neurologist. Okay, fine. It varies by specialty. And it also varies by geography. It matters, you know, what city or location you're in in America. Again, we're going to start with, like, the easiest places to make appointments, and then we're going to work our way up. So believe it or not, Houston is one of the easiest places to make appointments in America, where the average is 27 days to make an appointment. New York City, the Big Apple.

Look at this. Huge metropolitan area. All these millions of people. You would think it would be hard to make an appointment. It is hard, but it's a lot easier in New York than other places in America. Okay, 28 days to make an appointment in New York City. Phoenix, 31 days. Dallas-Fort Worth, 32 days. For Philadelphia and Washington, D.C., it's both 36 days. And then we start getting, I mean, shoot, this is high to begin with, but then we start getting into, like, ridiculous numbers. Like, Chicago, 39. San Diego, 41. Seattle, 44.

Minneapolis-St. Paul, 45. If you're an employee of UnitedHealthcare in UnitedHealthcare's headquarters, like, it's hard for you to make an appointment in your own hometown of Minneapolis-St. Paul. Okay, and then the longest by a long shot is Boston at 70 days. And I have heard this anecdotally for gobs of specialists when I talk to brokers and consultants and employers and just patients and other doctors in the Boston area. They're like, it is next to impossible to make an appointment in Boston. Okay, what's my point with all of these statistics? Is that if you are going to be making an appointment, it is a lot of work.

So if anyone says, oh, just make an appointment, be like, yeah, easier said than done. Okay? You're going to need to make a lot of phone calls. So anybody who's making an appointment or if you run an employee benefit plan and your employees and their family members need to make an appointment, just have the expectation that you're going to need to make a lot of phone calls in order to find a doctor who's going to be able to see you in a relatively expedient fashion. Okay, so we need to set that expectation.

Do we make one call and give up? Do we make two calls and give up? No. We probably need to make like five to ten calls. We need to smile and dial. So it is a ton of work here to access healthcare in America. And I wanted to quantify that for you today. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

