Title: Doctor - Hospital Co-Owned Ambulatory Surgery Centers _ASC__yjck2W68Z0o
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yjck2W68Z0o
Language: en
Duration: 6:23
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching AHealthcareZ. Today's topic is Doctor Hospital ASC Joint Ventures and by ASC I mean Ambulatory Surgery Center. Now, I have shown in a previous video about how there is a law called the Anti-Kickback Law which essentially says that a hospital or another physician cannot pay a bribe or a kickback for a referral. Now, there are exceptions to that rule and those exceptions to that rule are referred to as safe harbors. And so one of the ways that that manifests itself is as an exception where doctors can actually be part owners in an ambulatory surgery center.

And the reason that that needs to be an exception is because not only will the physician be paid their professional fee, but then they'll also be paid a percentage of the facility fee as well. So typically under Anti-Kickback Law that percentage of the facility fee would be thought of as the kickback. But because of the safe harbor, the doctor can still be paid that, right? So the doctors are paid their professional fee and a percentage of the facility fee for a procedure performed at that ambulatory surgery center.

And these ASCs are typically like across the street from the hospital, they might be down the road, it's where the same day surgery happens. Sometimes it might even be like connected to the hospital, and it might even have the hospital's name on it, even though it's the physicians that actually own or partially own it. Now, the physicians actually must perform procedures at that particular ASC. So in other words, physicians that don't perform procedures can't do this. So like as an internist, I cannot be a partial owner of an ASC.

Neither can psychiatrists, neither can family practice physicians. It's only for physicians that actually perform procedures. Now this is part of the reason why specialists and proceduralists make so much more money than primary care physicians. It's because these specialists and proceduralists have access to this safe harbor additional facility fee source of income, whereas the primary care physicians don't. Now, another layer of complexity on top of this is that instead of the physicians just owning the ASC outright, what they've done is they've entered into hospital ASC joint ventures.

In other words, the doctors have actually given up like half ownership of the ASC to a hospital system. Now why in the world would they do that? The reason for that is because commercial insurance companies are sort of forced by major hospital systems to have much higher rates of reimbursement. And so by having the physician, by having the hospital group be partial owners of the ASC, then the reimbursement rate gets to be at that very large hospital system rate, as opposed to just like a one-off ASC rate.

Like if a bunch of doctors owned an ASC and they tried to negotiate a really high reimbursement from Blue Cross United Signore Enda, they wouldn't get a very good deal. But if a major hospital system negotiates with those insurance carriers, they get a very good deal. And I'll give you an example of that. Okay, so this typically happens with folks like orthopedic surgeons, gastroenterologists for endoscopies, for surgeons for like laparoscopic cholecystectomies, or hernia surgeries, for even OBGYNs, for things like ovarian cyst surgeries.

These are all very common outpatient surgeries that are done at ASCs that are part of these joint ventures. Now, let's say for example, the professional fee is $900 to perform this particular surgery. Now, the facility fee at an ASC might be $2,500. Now that's the allowed amount, that's so might the bill charges will be higher, they'll discount it down and they'll receive the $25 as payment for the facility fee. Now, let's just say that, you know, the expenses for keeping the lights on and the nurses and running the ASC, let's say it cuts that, it takes 50% away from the facility fee.

So what you're left for in profit from the facility fee is $1,250. So if it was just a physician-owned ASC, and let's say it was just one doctor that owned it, then they would get $900 for the professional fee, plus another $1,250 for the facility fee. So essentially, the doctor would get paid twice as much for doing the same procedure. Now, if the hospital has a joint venture with that ASC, the physician will still be paid $900 for the professional fee, but now the facility fee is reimbursed at $7,500.

It's three times as much because the major hospital system can negotiate that much, quote unquote, a better deal or higher reimbursement from the insurance company. So again, let's just say that in order to run the ASC, you have to, you know, expend 50% of that in terms of costs. So in terms of profit, you take the $7,500, you divide it by two, you get $3,750 in profit. Okay, now that profit is then divided, let's say half to the hospital and half to the physicians, but half of $3,750 is $1,875, which is higher than $1,250, right? So by entering into this joint venture, the physicians still receive more.

So if you add the $1,875 plus the $900 for the professional fee, that doctor is essentially getting paid three times as much as if they were just receiving the professional fee alone. Now, this brings up some important questions. How would this impact the physician's decision to do or not do a procedure? Would it affect it at all? How would this impact the hospital's promotion of surgical procedures? Would this cause hospitals to promote having surgical procedures more than if they did not have these sorts of arrangements? Also too, I will say something else that is quite unique is, is that when I was in medical school, it's actually fairly rare for the child of a physician who is a specialist or a proceduralist to then go into primary care, right? So a lot of medical students are the children of doctors, okay? And so if somebody is the child of a primary care physician, they might go into primary care.

If someone has like no family history of anyone being in medicine, they might go into primary care. But if the child has a parent who's a specialist, they almost never go into primary care because their parent tells them about this, okay? Now, I'm not trying to be cynical. Certainly there are exceptions to this, but I wanted to show you one of the ways that people make a lot of money in medicine. And now you know. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

