Title: Doctors Can_t Own Hospitals... Why the Stark Law Is a Joke._-zcRmt8LkPI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-zcRmt8LkPI
Language: en
Duration: 12:44
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is doctors can't own hospitals. So what? Believe it or not, in America today, a doctor cannot own a hospital. It's against the law. And so that originally started back with something called the Stark Law, which was passed back in 1989, which it's a federal law that says that for any doctor that is receiving money for Medicare, which the vast majority of doctors in America do, they cannot self-refer. They can't refer patients into facilities that they own.

So me, for example, I'm an internist. Let's say I had my office down the street and I saw patients and I was like, oh, this is an emergency. You better go to the emergency room. Like I can't own the hospital that owns that emergency room. Or if it's one of these like freestanding emergency centers, like I can't own one of those things because then that would bias me to like every time a patient like came into my office, I'd be like, oh, that's an emergency because then they would go to the hospital and I would make more money because I sent them to the emergency room.

Okay. So like you shouldn't do that. And their motivation for that was like, look, because when doctors own hospitals, they're doing something called cherry picking. Well, they're only like treat patients that have commercial insurance that pays them a whole bunch of money. They're not going to take Medicare patients. They're not going to take Medicaid patients. They're not going to take people who don't have any money. So that was their one argument against it. The other argument against it was, no, the doctors, they're going to do this thing called lemon dropping.

Well, look, if you're just a really difficult patient to treat, they're like, well, this is going to be super complicated and we might end up like not making money on this. Then they will quote unquote drop the lemon patients, right? So they won't treat the really sick and difficult patients. They'll only take the easy ones. Okay. And then also too, like in my example of like the emergency room and me sending all my patients to the emergency room, they're like, look, if doctors own hospitals, they're just going to create excessive care.

They're going to do, they're going to create over-utilization. They're going to do unnecessary things. This is where, you know, people are like, okay, well, cardiologists are ordering stress tests on anybody that has a heart or gastroenterologists are doing upper endoscopies on anybody who has heartburn. And not everybody who has heartburn needs an upper endoscopy and not everybody who has a heart needs to have a stress test. And so the ACA put the final kibosh on doctors owning hospitals where there was a loophole that the ACA actually closed in 2010.

So now it's like there are some physician-owned facilities that were like grandfathered in, but like no new ones can like doctors be owners of. Okay. Now, so fine. That all sounds like a reasonable argument. Of course, doctors should not be able to own hospitals. Okay. The whole point was not to have the doctor's opinion for the patient be financially biased. But guess what? The Stark Law is a joke because the Stark Law is 100% completely circumvented today. Let me give you three examples of how. One, there is a safe, quote unquote, because you have to give things nice sounding names, right? So to say that the Stark Law is a joke and that people circumvented, you can't say that.

That sounds bad. Instead, you call it safe harbor because safety sounds wonderful and harbors sound wonderful. We'll just call it safe harbor, which means that you can totally refer to yourself if you're a surgeon and you own an ambulatory surgery center because you have safe harbor. You can totally refer to yourself if you're a gastroenterologist and you're a part owner of an ambulatory surgery center where you can do the endoscopy because it's a safe harbor. Okay. Listen, safe harbor is a total joke that makes a mockery out of the Stark Law.

Okay. Next up, there are joint ventures between doctors and hospitals where the doctors are the minority owners of a hospital. Okay. So doctors can't own a hospital. Doctors can't own the majority of the hospital. They can totally own part of a hospital. I used to work at a hospital that had physicians as part owners have a heart hospital right next door. So you absolutely have the exact same situation where the physicians can cherry pick and lemon drop and do excessive care. They're not the total owners of the hospital, but they're minority owners of the hospital.

In this case, it was the cardiologists were minority owners of this heart hospital. Thirdly, and most prominently, what makes the Stark Law a joke is that the doctors that work at hospitals and are employed by hospitals, they themselves are paid on an RVU incentive compensated structure. In other words, the more they do, the more they get paid. In other words, they get paid a commission. Okay. Let me show you specifically how this works. Let's say you've got the government, Medicare. That's supposed to be the Capitol building.

And then they pay the hospitals. And then the hospitals either pay the employees their compensation directly, or if the physician group isn't directly employed by the hospital, then the hospital group basically subsidizes the physician group with what they call a stipend. And then the doctors then take care of the patients and they order things like tests and procedures, where the patient then goes back, goes to the hospital to get the tests and procedures. But the physicians are compensated based upon how much they order, where the more they order to the hospital, the more they get paid as an employee, or the more of a stipend that they get if they're subsidized by the hospital.

So essentially, the doctors, they get paid for self-referral. It's the exact same thing. So the Stark Law, it's a joke. Okay, it's like, so there's no point in like arguing about whether or not doctors can own hospitals because it creates a financial misalignment. The financial misalignment exists anyway. Okay, so really, like if the financial misalignment exists anyway, why don't you just let doctors own it too? Like what makes hospital administrators so special, right? Why not cut out the middleman, right? So instead of having the government pay the hospital, have the government just pay the doctors directly.

And instead of having the doctors work for the administrators, why don't you have the administrators just work for the doctors? And the doctors will take care of the patients and the administrators will work for the doctors and then the patients will still go back to the doctors and they'll still be doing self-referral. And all this is, it's just like anything else, it's just your typical human battle for money and power. That's all it is. Because everyone knows the sort of facetious golden rule. He who has the gold makes the rules.

And right now, it is the hospital administrators that have the gold and make the rules and the doctors work for them. And the doctors don't like that. So the doctors are like, no, we want the gold and we want to make the rules and we want the hospital administrators to work for us. That's all this is about. Okay? Now, what really matters? All those machinations don't matter. Here's what really matters. What really matters is, is that the patient needs to be put first. We need to put the patient first. Now, arguably, who can put the patient first? Can doctors and nurses who have experience treating patients, who have literally with their own eyes seen another human being suffering and say, look, your suffering and the alleviation of that suffering? Like, that's what comes first.

Okay? Like, those are the types of people who need to be put in charge. People who will put the patients first. Now, are there hospital administrators in America who absolutely push the patient first? Of course! Are there hospital administrators that actually put patients first better than doctors and nurses themselves put patients first? Of course! Are there doctors and nurses that put other things first before patients? Sure! Absolutely! So the point is, it's not, are you a doctor, are you a nurse, are you an administrator? Shoot! At one of the hospitals that I rotated through in Chicago when I was in medical school, the CEO of the hospital, the head hospital administrator, she was a nun! She would walk around the halls of the hospital like, with her habit and a briefcase.

Okay? Like, did this nun put patient first? I would argue, absolutely she did. And she probably did a better job of putting patients first than like, any other doctor in that hospital. So, the issue is not, is it a doctor, is it an administrator? Like, that's not the issue. The issue is, whoever is in charge has to put the patient first. Okay, so that's fine. That all sounds like, all nice and rosy, but like, how would you actually accomplish that? Okay, so, one, it would be getting rid of this, like, whole, um, cliche that administrators say of no margin, no mission.

People say, oh, well, we gotta make money, otherwise we can't have a mission. Okay, I've got a new cliche to get rid of that cliche. My new saying is, no mission, no dice. Okay, and the mission is the patients. And no dice is like a refusal. Like, hey mom, I wanna stay out till 2 a.m. in the morning. And mom says, no dice. The answer is, you can't participate. So, in healthcare, no mission, no dice. If you don't put the patient first, you can't even participate. Okay, and oh, by the way, that goes for health insurance companies too.

Because remember, United and Optum employ physicians. United and Optum have healthcare facilities that deliver care, like ambulatory surgery centers. So, I would argue that any organization, this applies to HCA, Hospital Corporation America, this applies to Tenant, that the shareholders do not come first. They do not. One hundred percent. The shareholders do not come first. The patients come first. Because if you don't have the mission, then you can't even participate. And some very practical ways of doing this is just, look, you have completely transparent compensation incentives.

You don't have to give everybody's like take-home salary out there, but specifically, how they're getting paid needs to be made public. Right? Famous saying I say on here all the time is that sunlight is the greatest disinfectant. So, it's not just, oh, by the way, the doctor happens to be an owner. Or, oh, by the way, the administrator happens to be an owner. It is specifically, like, their compensation, like right now, what percent of hospital CEO and hospital administrator compensation, what percentage of their compensation is directly related to patient care? Like, needs to be easily, and like, on the front page of the website of every single hospital, how are the administrators getting paid who run this place? That's number one.

Number two is, there needs to, in addition to transparent compensation, there needs to be transparent accountability. In other words, when clinical decisions are made at the hospital, like, specifically policies, if there's a policy that's done, it then, like, that policy has a person's name assigned to it who signed off on it. And oh, by the way, we have a rubric for this in the financial world. It's when they passed Sarbanes-Oxley that said that, look, the CEO of the company has to sign off on the financials, and they are liable if those financials are fraudulent.

Likewise, maybe you need to have a clinical person who takes ultimate clinical responsibility, including somebody who takes ultimate clinical responsibility at United, and they signed their name next to the decisions, the clinical policies that were made, the clinical policies that were made at the hospital. And it is transparent, specifically, who made those decisions. Because if you are publicly accountable, I would argue, you would probably make different decisions than if you were not publicly accountable.

So there you have it. Doctors can't own hospitals in America, and what's really important is that whoever is owning hospitals in America, they need to put the patient first. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

