Title: Doctors Split from Hospital System... How_d They Do It___KgPp0sXIKpk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KgPp0sXIKpk
Language: en
Duration: 8:57
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is doctors split from hospital. How did they do it? That's right, I'm going to tell you the story today of a physician practice that was owned by a hospital system that decided that they had had enough and so they split apart from that hospital system. The physician group that I'm talking about is Tryon Medical Partners in Charlotte, North Carolina and the hospital system they split from was Atrium, which is the very large hospital system in Charlotte.

Now, in order for Tryon Medical Partners to split from the hospital system, they actually had to sue the hospital and they had 88 doctors out of the total group practice was about a little over 100 and the vast majority of them, 88 of them, stuck together and they said, we want out. Now, they are mostly primary care doctors, internal medicine doctors that are in clinics throughout the city, but it's also a multi-specialty practice so about 20-25 of these folks were actually cardiologists and dermatologists and pulmonologists, endocrinologists, okay, so they had to sue in order to separate.

They did a very brave thing. Now, ultimately, why did they sue? What were their grievances? So, it turns out that Atrium was cutting nurses out of their clinics and replacing them with medical assistants. Well, shoot, the doctors didn't like that. They felt like the nurses were more effective in patient care. Now, why would a hospital system replace nurses with medical assistants? Because medical assistants are cheaper. You don't have to pay them as much. What's next? The hospital system was having the doctors decrease their visit times so that they were requiring the doctors to see four patients an hour, so a patient every 15 minutes, which by the time you're inspecting the chart and looking at the labs and coordinating care and maybe getting on the phone with one or two people, etc., etc., that left them only eight minutes of face-to-face time with each patient.

And the doctors felt like that wasn't good for their patients. It wasn't good for their practice. And especially if you're practicing primary care, the key ingredient to successful primary care is time. When you have complex patients with complex diseases and you need to coordinate care amongst a bunch of different specialists and you need to keep people out of the hospital and make sure their medications aren't interacting, etc., then an effective detailed history and communication with the patient is like the number one thing that a primary care doc can do.

And that requires time. Well, guess what hospital systems don't have? They don't have time because they bill fee for service. And so they want to have as many patients as seen by these docs as possible. Why is that also conducive to the hospital business model? Because the less time that you have to see patients, then instead of spending time with a detailed history and physical, you just order more tests and more procedures and refer to more specialists. Got an issue? Specialist here. Got another issue? Specialist there.

Instead of the doctor actually taking the time to try to figure out what might be the issue and take care of it there in the primary care clinic. Okay, fine. What happened? Atrium said, fine, we'll set you free if you drop the lawsuit. Let's see what happens to the patient. So they wrote a joint letter to the patient explaining the split. And 91,000 of their patients out of roughly 110,000 came with the doctors. So it was like over 80% of the patients stayed with their doctors, which shows that the loyalty is really with the doctor and not with the hospital system.

And that's important later on that I'll get to. So what did the doctors have to do? Shoot, they had to open eight clinics in less than six months. They had to be able to pay for all this. All this takes money. It was doctor financed. So the doctors themselves had to invest in their practice. Nothing comes for free. This was a big risk for all of them to leave the hospital system and to start their own practice. But as a result, they then were owners in the practice. They didn't own the practice at Atrium, but now they owned try on medical partners.

Now, what does that mean? That means that you as an owner, shoot, it's like being an entrepreneur. You got to roll up your sleeves. 47 of the docs were like on the phones, answering the phones in the beginning with the patients, which I think is awesome because like that's the way like business should be, especially a services business. You want to have as few layers as possible as in between the patients and the care providers, whether it be the doc or the nurse practitioner, et cetera. And so instead of having a call center, like they had at Atrium, they actually had in the beginning, the doctors actually on the phones talking with the patients.

Okay. So what did they do? This all happened in 2018 in less than a year, because if you go to the Tryon website, what's one of the things that an independent physician group can do? It can actually focus on high quality cost effective care. They can focus on lowering the cost of healthcare. Well, guess who's interested in lowering the cost of healthcare? Local employers in Charlotte. So what did they do? They started a direct primary care service to those employers where they could sign up on a subscription basis.

No billing. You don't have to bill the insurance. There's no claims and unlimited visits. They have 30 employer groups that are signed up for this now. It has been hugely successful. And there are direct primary care groups in Kansas and in Colorado and in Detroit and all over America that do direct contracting with employers. It's a fantastic model. I wish we had 88 doctors doing direct primary care in Dallas. Shoot. We don't even have close to that many doctors doing direct primary care in Dallas. So if you live in Charlotte or you're an employer in Charlotte, you're actually incredibly lucky that you have this local resource that's doing direct primary care because that allows the doctors to spend more time with the employees to provide better care, more coordinated care, and lower cost care.

Because it allows you to then prevent so many hospitalizations and ER visits and unnecessary referrals to specialists. It's been proven over and over again. Third generation patient-centered medical home, which is exactly what they're doing here. I'll leave a link in the show notes to my other videos around direct primary care and patient-centered medical homes and the success that it has had in places like Inner Mountain, etc. It's awesome. It's so amazing that they've been able to do this. Now, so fun. Why is this so important? Because it allows for the financial alignment.

It allows them to get off the fee for service hamster wheel. And they're not only doing this through their direct primary care practice, but they also go at risk with Medicare Advantage plans. Aha! A la the ChenMed model. It's awesome. As an independent practice, it allows you so much freedom to no longer be chained to fee for service, which doesn't make sense for primary care. Fee for service is the dumbest way, humanly possible, to pay for primary care. And when you're an independent practice, it allows you the freedom to no longer be tied to that system.

Okay, so how is all this possible? The beginning of this video, how is this possible? I'll tell you how it's possible. One word. Courage. I'm going to give you a quote from Aristotle. Aristotle said, Courage is the first virtue that makes all others possible. The only reason that Trion's been able to have the success is because they had courage. Now, they had courage because they wanted to do better for their patients. They wanted to do better for themselves. You know, you hear so much about physician burnout. Well, listen, they had the courage to exit out of their hospital system.

Now, you don't... And people... Listen, everybody likes to complain. I like to complain. It's a totally normal human thing to do. That's a good thing. It's a normal human thing to do. That's okay. But they had the courage to act on it. They had the courage to exit and to do something else. And all of us have the capacity to do that. Whether you're working at an insurance company, whether you're working at a hospital, whether you're working at a physician practice that's owned by a hospital, you name it, we are all free to exit and start anew.

And so I really want to applaud Trion Medical Partners for the example that they've set for us. And I wanted to share that with you today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

