Title: Doctor Specialty Rankings_  The R.O.A.D. to Happiness__ySEo21Qbb5s
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ySEo21Qbb5s
Language: en
Duration: 5:16
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the road to happiness. Now I'm about to tell you a secret that is known amongst physicians that the general public is generally not aware of and frankly after I tell you this I might be like ostracized from the doctor community. My friends from medical school watch these videos and they might never talk to me again but I'm willing to take that risk because you need to the road of the truth and that truth revolves around how doctor specialties have a competitive hierarchy.

That's right, there is a pecking order among the different physician specialties and I say the road to happiness because this is sort of a joke that is in medical school as being the specialties that will lead to the greatest happiness with the road being radiology, ophthalmology, anesthesia and dermatology. Now why does that lead to happiness? It's because that these specialties receive the highest pay, the highest reimbursement for a comparatively good lifestyle and by good lifestyle I mean like you don't have to work a ton of hours, you don't have to work weekends, you don't have to work nights, you don't have to work holidays, you don't have to do a whole bunch of emergencies and so here the really the to a certain extent like the smartest like most capable medical students, they went into these specialties.

Okay, the next tier down are the surgical specialties and procedural subspecialties. By that I mean like general surgery, vascular surgery and all different surgical subspecialties and also proceduralists like cardiologists and gastroenterologists and also other sort of procedure based specialties like ENT and urology as well. Now they make a ton of money, in fact they might even make more than the road to happiness folks but they got to put in a ton of hours, they got to work weekends, they got to work nights, they got to work holidays and so and the reason that they get paid a lot is because when you do procedures you end up getting paid more and so that's another topic for another day but that then brings us to tier three.

So tier three are still specialists but they don't make as much money because they don't do as many procedures and so that would be folks like pathologists and ER doctors, pulmonary and critical care doctors in the ICU, nephrologists at the dialysis centers, neurologists, these folks are super smart and either because they have a particular interest in this area or they just don't care as much about money then they're tier three physicians. Now the bottom tier, the bottom of the barrel so to speak, I say that facetiously, is primary care and psychiatry and that includes general internal medicine.

I mean I'm an internist right, pediatrics, family practice and mental health professionals like psychiatrists. Now note that on A Healthcare Z videos and many other places you've heard that sort of the backbone of high quality cost effective care is primary care. Notice that within the physician's community, they're at the bottom. Okay, so in terms of like the priority of society or an employer, in terms of like population health management, just know that within the physician community, it's kind of like meh.

And really where the schism is, is between the primary care physicians and the top three tiers. And why is that? It's because competition among physicians is really based here. It's based in the intellectual capability or the smartness, if you will, of each person. And guess what? A lot of these specialties, frankly from an intellectual capability, they look down upon primary care physicians as their intellectual inferiors. They just don't know as much. Now, those primary care physicians, unfortunately, they have a fair amount of resentment because they don't make as much money.

Because they don't do procedures, they talk to people. And talking to people takes time. So you can't crank through 25, 30, 40, 50 patients a day when you actually have to take the time to talk to them. Okay? And so that is like very well played out in the physician parking lot. Where the hospital that I used to work, the neurosurgeon drove a Bentley, one of the general surgeons drove a white convertible BMW, and then one of my fellow internists, she drove a Toyota minivan, and then another internist drove like a Mini Cooper.

And so now, of course, there are exceptions to this. There are many of these physicians that don't look down on primary care physicians. And there's many primary care physicians that are like, look, I don't really resent the fact that you make more money. But I'm saying, in general, this is probably true. Now, why is this important? It's important because doctors are not a monolith. So oftentimes, when we hear about changes that need to happen within the healthcare system, we kind of lump all doctors together.

And that's just not the case in terms of their priorities and their motivations and their interests. They're a highly diverse group. And that not only holds true for physicians, that also holds true for insurance brokers and benefits consultants, for insurance carrier reps, for pharmaceutical representatives, for hospital administrators. And so when we're looking to make change within the healthcare system, it's important for us to understand that all of these constituencies or groups are not monoliths, and to appreciate the diversity of opinions within each of those groups, so that we can all work together with those folks that are motivated to improve healthcare.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Thank you..

