Title: Doctors Subconsciously Influenced by Pharma_S1dUanW2fBY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S1dUanW2fBY
Language: en
Duration: 5:48
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is doctors subconsciously influenced specifically by the pharmaceutical industry. Now what I have here is a chart from a study in 2015 of physician prescribing in Washington DC. But it probably could be extrapolated to many other parts of America as well. In the first column we have the types of gifts that the physicians were receiving in the study. It has the average cost of the prescriptions that they wrote and then it has the average percent of brand medications of those prescriptions that they wrote.

So as we go through this chart those physicians that didn't receive any gifts from pharmaceutical companies had an average prescription that they wrote that cost $85 and 26% of the prescriptions that they wrote were for brand name medications. Now for physicians that received gifts but those gifts were for less than $500 their average prescription cost was higher. It was $114 per prescription and the percentage of brand medications that they prescribed was also higher. It was 30%. Now we have physicians that receive gifts of greater than $500 and guess what the average cost of their prescriptions was still higher at $189 per prescription on average and the percentage of their prescriptions that were brand name prescriptions were also higher at 40%.

Now it's important to note here that this is correlation right this is not necessarily causation but there seems to be a pretty direct correlation here between pharmaceutical companies paying doctors and doctors prescribing more expensive brand name medications. Now the big point of today is okay because it's been reported everywhere right you know influence the pharmacy gifts yada yada yada influence the doctors they prescribe the expensive stuff okay fine but the next study which is also incredibly interesting looked at a medical education session that was sponsored by a drug company and it was small it was only for 20 doctors but they found that after that sponsored session by the drug company that the prescriptions increased increased by 300% increased by 300% for two of the medications promoted by those drug companies okay so like not up by 50% not up by 100% it tripled and here's the interesting thing 19 out of the 20 doctors in other words 95% of the doctors believe or deny that the sponsorship by the pharmaceutical company had any impact on their prescribing.

So only one of the doctors was like yeah I listened to the drug company thing and I thought it was a good idea so I increased my prescribing of XYZ drug like the other doctors totally denied it they're like look I might have gotten a free lunch but I did not change my prescribing habits whatsoever because of that and that's obviously not true so the point is that this is happening subconsciously so that if you go to doctors and say to them look you're being influenced look they'll like they won't be lying to you they honestly don't think they're being influenced okay so this comes from a blog by Dr.

Jason Fung who's a fairly famous and controversial he's a nephrologist in Canada actually but he has widely read blog that he writes and in this blog where this data comes from he says look there are some solutions they're pretty straightforward look doctors should not receive any outside compensation  but they're not a problem I mean it's laudable but let's be realistic here and this relates to yesterday's video as it relates to a hospital system that also runs a health plan in other words they're essentially taking capitated risk because they're collecting premium and then using that fixed premium to provide care.

So hospitals that run health insurance plans in effect they would police themselves right they would want their doctors prescribing the highest quality lowest cost medications they wouldn't want those doctors prescribing high cost low quality medications because they're being paid outside gifts by pharmaceutical companies. So like it would make sense that if you had a hospital system that ran a health plan that you wouldn't get this type of shenanigans and guess what that's exactly what you get at the Kaiser Permanente healthcare system in California where in 2005 they banned their physicians from receiving outside gifts like tickets or meals or honoraria which is a payment for speaking for for a you know an educational session okay so my point is is that we don't necessarily need like acts of Congress or what have you just know that if the financial centers are correct for the healthcare provider doctor nurse practitioner etc that a lot of this stuff works itself out and that's my point for today thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

