Title: Dr. Marty Makary Book _Unaccountable_ - Healthcare Quality Secrets Revealed_IqaPwjS3-E8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IqaPwjS3-E8
Language: en
Duration: 12:18
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Dr. Marty McCary's book, Unaccountable. Now this is Dr. McCary's first book and I was thinking the previous video that I made last week regarding Vivian Lee's book, The Long Fix, the whole time I'm reading this thing and talking about it to you on A Healthcare Z, I'm thinking to myself, you know, there's just a real accountability problem. In healthcare, it was like a total lack of accountability and then I said to myself, aha, Marty McCary already wrote a book about that called Unaccountable and I had forgotten about it because it was his first book and it was written a while ago.

So, for those of you, Dr. Marty McCary's kind of a celebrity, but for those of you who don't know, he's a professor of surgery at Johns Hopkins, huge advocate for transparency within healthcare. And his book, The Price We Pay, which is his most recent book, came about a year, year and a half ago, hugely popular, highly encourage you to read it, it's fantastic, but it's his second book. The first book that he wrote is called Unaccountable and it was written all the way back in 2012. It was written nine years ago and it was popular back then, but I would say that his book, The Price We Pay, is like more popular now, but I would argue that like Unaccountable is actually a better book in my opinion.

So, The Price We Pay is Dr. McCary's healthcare cost book and Unaccountable is Dr. McCary's healthcare quality book and it talks about a lot of the same healthcare quality themes that we talk about here on A Healthcare Z. One, that healthcare is highly variable and it tells the fascinating story of the Shah of Iran, which frankly I had never heard about before. But, of course, many of you are familiar with the Shah of Iran. He was ousted, Ayatollah Khomeini, and the current regime that's in Iran is there today.

The Shah was essentially a king or a dictator at the same time he was an ally of the United States. But here was the thing. He had leukemia that caused his spleen to be enlarged. Enlarged to the point where it needed to be surgically removed. Now, the Shah of Iran was in exile in Egypt at this time and the United States government was involved and they called Dr. DeBakey from Houston to operate on the Shah's spleen. Now, Dr. DeBakey, Dr. Michael DeBakey is one of the most famous surgeons in the world and at that time he might have been the most famous surgeon in the world.

So they said, aha, to remove the Shah's spleen we've got to get Dr. DeBakey. They put him on a plane, they take him to Egypt. Dr. DeBakey operates and removes the Shah's spleen. However, he does not leave a drain next to the pancreas, which is standard surgical procedure for a splenectomy, surgical removal of the spleen, because it's very common to inadvertently nick the pancreas, causing pancreatic enzymes to leak out and cause damage and potentially infection in that area. It's the standard protocol to leave a drain.

Dr. DeBakey did not leave a drain because he was so confident that he had not nicked the spleen. Now, here's the punchline. Dr. DeBakey is a heart surgeon. He is not an abdominal cavity or a spleen surgeon. So, here we have highly variable healthcare quality from, just because the surgeon is famous. I'm not judging Dr. DeBakey about this here. I'm just saying, and I'll leave a link to the healthcare mismatch video that I did, but really the key to a fantastic, high quality, great outcome healthcare experience is matching the right patient with the right physician.

So, here the Shah of Iran, politically, and this is in 1980, politically one of the most important people in the world. And Dr. DeBakey was a physician mismatch with the Shah's problem with his spleen and his leukemia. So, and oh, by the way, the same thing happened with Steve Jobs when he was at Stanford, right? So, he had to go to Memphis to get a liver transplant, and even Steve Jobs couldn't get well-coordinated, you know, high-quality care, etc. So, the point is, is that you've got to have the right match.

And if one of the most important people in the world can't get the right match, then we, as just patients, consumers, whatever you want to call us, human beings, whatever you want to call us, we need to have the expectation that we should assume patient-physician mismatch until proven otherwise. And Dr. McCary's solution to that is not only to get a second opinion, but he even encourages getting a third opinion about things. Okay, next up, about quality. Healthcare quality is deceptive. Specifically, he talks about the paternalistic practice at Harvard Medical School when he was there for basically getting informed consent from patients in regards to various therapies.

He was following along a patient with ovarian cancer as a medical student, and she didn't really want to have chemotherapy and surgery and treatment for her ovarian cancer because she was very elderly. And basically, she was, like, convinced of having that happen. And Martin McCary was like, look, this is wrong. You basically deceived this woman into getting this treatment. You kind of overemphasized the benefits and you de-emphasized all the risks. And as a result, like, she died. She probably died more prematurely from the intervention for the ovarian cancer than she would have died from the ovarian cancer.

And he was so upset about this, he dropped out of medical school. Okay? I mean, that is incredibly rare to drop out of medical school. And he dropped out after his third year at one of the most prestigious medical schools in America. Like, you've got to be kidding me. Who does that? Now, Martin McCary does that. He went, he got a master's in public health, got on this train of studying health care systems. If he hadn't dropped out of medical school and has gotten his MPH from Harvard, then he would have never written unaccountable.

He would have never written the price we pay. So it was very serendipitous that this happened for him. And he's turned that horrible experience for that woman into positive change. But he saw the exact same deceptive practices that we talk about here on A Healthcare Seed. Finally, he talks about how poor health care quality, it's hidden. So at the Georgetown Surgery Program, where he did his residency, he specifically talks about an incident where he was the lone surgical resident during a trauma situation where there was upwards of like 22 people in the emergency room.

And he called his senior resident for help. He said, I can't deal with all the 22 people at once. You've got to come in and help. And the senior resident's reply to him was, sounds like you need to get more organized, Dr. McCary. And he hung up the phone. And as a result of Dr. McCary rationing care all by himself in the emergency room of D.C. General Hospital when he was a resident at Georgetown, that like two of those people died. And potentially two of those people would not have died had he gotten like more assistance.

And all that was swept under the rug. And so Dr. McCary does something very brave here. I mean, he essentially like calls out the Georgetown Surgery Residency Program. He calls out Harvard Medical School. He does something very brave because no one speaks up. And that's a big part of his point of unaccountable. The overarching theme is, is that when you have physicians who essentially don't have a boss and are not accountable to anyone, like bad stuff happens. Bad stuff related to quality happens. Which is why I think this book is more important than the cost thing.

At the end of the day, I mean, you know America today. We just print money, right? Who cares about health care costs? Cost is just a proxy for access. The only reason I care about health care costs is because I want people to be able to access health care. At the end of the day, it's not really the money. Apparently we just print that these days. But the quality is a huge deal. And it's exactly what this book is about. Okay, now, another example for change that he brings up in this book is a Colorado mom. Some of you may be familiar with her.

By the name of Patty Skolnick. And the unfortunate story of her son, Michael, who at the age of 22, had a scan that showed a little 3mm abnormality in his brain. And subsequently was operated on by a neurosurgeon who, it turned out, had only done this type of operation once before and had malpractice suits in his past. Which, at that time, were not listed anywhere. It was impossible for Patty Skolnick to look up this surgeon's history. And as a result of what happened to Michael Skolnick afterwards, he was just debilitated and lived a life of suffering for multiple years afterwards until he finally passed away at a very young age.

I think he was like 25 when he passed away. It was essentially like a 3-month nightmare is how Ms. Skolnick describes it. And as a result, she, like, got the law changed in Colorado so that physician backgrounds and their lawsuits, etc., etc., can be, like, easily looked up on the internet so that people can see what physicians' paths are. And it not just applies to physicians now, but for all sorts of professionals in Colorado. There's greater professional transparency in Colorado than any other state in America.

And it's literally only because of Patty Skolnick. Right? So, Dr. McCary does something similar where Dr. McCary does something similar in a totally different way. Where he would actually act as the expert witness for patients who were being sued by hospitals for bills they didn't pay. And as a result of Marty McCary's effort, this whole idea of hospitals suing patients to garnish their wages had been going on for a long time. And it received national media attention. And the hospitals stopped doing it because they were so embarrassed by what they were actually doing.

Because they got caught. Because it became transparent. Because they became accountable to the population. So what does Dr. McCary have to do with patient billing? And Patty Skolnick have in common. Is an incredibly courageous person is actually capable of change. Right? It's the famous quote that the courageous person might actually be like the only thing that's capable of change. But also, so it's not just the individual courageous person, which is one of the necessary ingredients. It's also too, they have to do something that's incredibly unpopular.

And then finally, they have to be able to do it for a prolonged period of time. For years and years and years. They have to do something courageous and unpopular. For years and years and years. Before it gets noticed. To give it time to snowball. To allow it to turn into a movement. And so, if we look at healthcare change today. That actually gives us a very good barometer of what's real change and what's phony change. Because if you see change that's quote unquote popular. Or that's being adopted by the mainstream organizations within healthcare.

It's probably not real change. And if it's change that is adopted by organizations. I would argue that's probably not real change. Because real change comes from incredibly courageous individuals. Who are willing to do something incredibly unpopular. That's the problem with organizational change. Organizations by definition can't change in an unpopular fashion. It takes one person to lead the unpopular movement. In order for then the organization to follow. It's never the vice versa. It's never an organization doing unpopular things.

Because by definition the people won't follow an organization doing things that's unpopular. So, what's my point for today? My point for today is that Marty McCary's first book, Unaccountable. Unaccountable really hits the nail on the head. I highly encourage you to read it. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

