Title: Economic Cycles in Healthcare_3a83fNgTkug
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3a83fNgTkug
Language: en
Duration: 3:55
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing economic cycles in healthcare. More specifically, the effects of recessions on employer-sponsored health plans. And so what I have here is a chart that has recessions in reverse chronological order here, the unemployment rate, and the trend in healthcare cost inflation. So in other words, healthcare cost inflation went down during these years. Okay, now let's examine each recession. So the most recent recession from 2008 to 2009 had unemployment peak at 10% in 2010 and then subsequently the rate of healthcare cost inflation went down from 2010 to 2013.

Next, the recession of 2001, sort of the dot-com bubble bursting, right, that had unemployment spike at 6.5% in 2002 and then healthcare cost inflation went down from 2002 to 2005. Then the recession from 1990 to 1991, which some of you may remember, unemployment peaked at 8% in 1991 and then healthcare cost inflation went down from 1994 to 1997. So that's kind of hard to see with a chart of numbers, but let's look at that trend graphically, right? So you had a recession in 1990 to 1991, the spikes, healthcare costs come down.

You had a recession in 2001, unemployment spikes, healthcare costs come down. You have a recession in 2008 to 2009, unemployment goes up, healthcare costs go down. So note that there is obviously a repeated pattern here. So what are the implications of this pattern? One, employer interest in healthcare cost containment strategies is counter-cyclical. So note that things like a consumer-directed health plan with an HSA or an HRA, on-site near-site clinic, direct contracting, reference-based pricing, all of these strategies are effective in lowering healthcare costs, right? So they work.

However, their popularity in the marketplace goes along with a recession. It goes along with like a reversal in economic expansion, right? So what does that mean? That, you know, we've had economic expansion for the last several years that has been very rapid. And as a result, the employer interest in healthcare strategies that lower costs is kind of lower, right? Because there's always this balance between attracting, retaining employees and being able to put in strategies that lower healthcare costs.

Okay. So what does that mean? That means that if you're promoting one of these strategies that really, it's kind of like comedy or baseball, like timing is everything, right? So your timing of when you are promoting these strategies and the appetite for the marketplace for these strategies is highly counter-cyclical. Okay. Note also the duration of the healthcare costs decreasing from 2010 to 2013. That's four years. From 2002 to 2005, that's four years. From 1994 to 1997, that's four years. So you kind of have a four-year window to put this stuff in place before the unemployment rate comes down so much that employers then lose again the appetite to put in these various strategies.

Okay. The only other point I will add is that obviously in order for healthcare costs to go down in 10, 2, and 4, 94, that they actually have to put in place those strategies or start planning for them at least a year before or six to 18 months in advance, right? So just know that a lot, and we saw this at Compass, right? We saw a huge increase in demand for our services in 2009, right? And so just know that if you are trying to promote ways to lower healthcare costs, that to a certain extent, like who knows when or if the next recession is coming, but really that might be when there is tremendous change in the healthcare marketplace.

It's really more recession-based than anything else. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

