Title: Economic Rent Seeking in Healthcare_eID3vRQ7O_4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4
Language: en
Duration: 5:41
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Economic Rent Seeking in Healthcare. Now, we are not talking about apartment rentals. This is totally different. But this topic came to mind from an article from CNBC from October 1st of 2019. And in it, a gentleman by the name of Boris Schlossberg said, they, as in the healthcare industry, have pretty much squeezed all the rentier profits that they can. Now, I thought that was kind of odd. The word rentier profits. What in the world was he talking about? But then I remembered this concept of economic rent seeking.

So if we're going to talk about healthcare finance here on A Healthcare Z, that we all need to understand this concept of economic rent seeking. Okay, what is it? It is added wealth without added value. Whether it's by individual or organizations or companies, when they try to add wealth or income or revenue without adding any actual value or, you know, giving something extra in return, that's called rent seeking. Another definition of rent seeking is trying to obtain benefits through politics. And this happens not only in healthcare, but in many other places as well.

Okay, it typically takes the form of either a subsidy or regulations that decrease competition. Instead of calling it rent seeking, another way to think about it is that it's privilege seeking. So individuals or organizations or companies seek privilege. Okay, let's go through some examples of seeking privilege or seeking rents within healthcare. Well, in terms of subsidies, probably the most obvious one is the premium subsidies that people of low incomes get with the Affordable Care Act, right? So here is a huge subsidy for buying a product, right? And that product is not corn or flour or sugar.

That product is a health insurance policy. So just like there's subsidies for farm products, we have a huge subsidy for insurance products as well. Okay, next, each individual insurance product or fully insured product has to be licensed at the state level. Okay, so it has been proposed over the years to be able to sell insurance like across state lines. Currently, you can't do that. So in other words, if you wanted to sell insurance in all 50 states over a number of the states, you'd have to go through to each individual state insurance department and get approved.

So if you're an incumbent insurance company, you love that because you've already gone through that process. And if you're a competitor trying to get in, you hate that because you have to go through 50 different insurance offices to actually make that happen. Okay, next up, doctors themselves engage in rent-seeking behavior because they are very strong proponents of only physicians being able to prescribe medications. Now, there's been some expansion of that in terms of nurse practitioners and physician's assistants being able to prescribe, but they have to be under the supervision of a doctor.

And each state has very specific rules about that. And guess what? Nurse practitioners and physician's assistants are actually pushing to have expanded ability to prescribe medications because right now this could be considered rent-seeking behavior on the part of physicians. Okay, next up, the importation of drugs, right? We all know that in Canada and other countries in the world, prescription medications are much less expensive, right? And right now, it is against the law to import those medications into America, right? Again, that is rent-seeking, babe.

You're on the part of the pharmaceutical companies in America. Okay, next up, extension of patents. Again, right now, the way that patent law is written and enforced that it allows, whether it be medical device or drug companies, allows them to, in many situations, extend that patent beyond what maybe it was originally intended. Okay, next up, the non-profit status of hospitals, right? So hospitals need to be able to have, quote-unquote, community benefit to prove that they are actually, that they should be allowed to have that non-profit status.

They don't pay property tax, right? So this is where hospitals sit on some of the most valuable real estate in many parts of America, and they don't pay tax on it. That can be thought of as a subsidy to those hospitals. Is it warranted? Is it not? I don't know, but it's rent-seeking behavior. Okay, next up, certificate of need laws. We've talked about this in previous Compass videos, excuse me, A Health Care Z videos as well, where we've said that, look, in certain states, you have to get approval from a state regulator to build a hospital.

Well, if you're an existing hospital, you love that law, because that way it allows you to stop other hospitals that compete with you from building, right? So then, again, certificate of need laws, rent-seeking behavior. And probably the granddaddy of all rent-seeking behavior is the fact that health insurance provided by employers is not considered taxable income. I'll say that again. The health insurance benefits that people get through their jobs is not taxable income. And by some estimates, this is actually the largest tax subsidy in America.

It is larger than the mortgage interest deduction subsidy that people get from paying interest on their mortgage. They get to take that off their taxes. Okay? So, what's my point? My point is, is that according to this quote here, this particular financial analyst personally thinks, it's just his opinion, that the healthcare industry has squeezed as much as they can out of this rent-seeking behavior. Is he right? Is he wrong? I don't know. But it's important for us to all be aware of what rent-seeking is and where it exists in healthcare.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

