Title: Elective Surgery Highest in December... Why__SfNX6iH4s1g
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SfNX6iH4s1g
Language: en
Duration: 6:15
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is elective surgery is seasonal. Now when I work as a hospitalist at a community hospital here in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, I noticed something very strange. I figured around the holidays, like between Thanksgiving and Christmas and especially the week between Christmas and New Year's, I thought the hospital would be very quiet. And then I found out just the opposite. It was packed, especially that week between Christmas and New Year's.

We were crazy busy, especially with like elective surgeries and I was scratching my head, it's like what is going on? And apparently it wasn't just the hospital that I worked, this is a national phenomenon. So there is a 9% increase in elective surgeries as reported by the Chicago Tribune and according to some surgeons it's as high as a 20% increase during the month of December. Now by elective surgeries, what do we mean? We think mean things like joint replacements, which are like hip and knee replacements, endoscopies, which are like colonoscopies and upper endoscopies, sinus surgery, carpal tunnel release.

So in other words, not emergency surgery, like not like an emergency appendectomy, right, where you're having, you're throwing up at a really high fever, horrible abdominal pain, they got to rush you to the operating room. By elective, that just means that it's scheduled, right? So you might really need to get your HIPAA placed, but it's considered elective because it's scheduled, it's not an emergency. Okay, fine. So why would this happen? So one of the reasons is that of course at the end of the year, this is when people have met their deductible and their out-of-pocket max for their commercial insurance plan.

So the out-of-pocket cost for the patient themselves is highly impacting the timing of their procedure. What's another reason? So it allows the person to recover over the holidays so that they don't have to miss any work. So notice here that the timing is not clinically driven. The timing is highly money and work related. Let me say that again. The timing of the surgery is not clinical. It is money and work related. So listen, medicine and healthcare is not practiced in a bubble. So this is a specific example of how healthcare utilization is driven seasonally by money and work.

Okay. Now, what are the implications of this? So if you're a self-funded plan and you do budgeting, let's say, let's look at a specific example. You know that your outpatient procedural costs are going to balloon somewhat during the month of December. And that's important because you're not going to see those December claims until they're filed and processed and adjudicated, which is probably going to be January or February. So you're not going to truly know your plan spend, which might be surging in December until after the first of the year.

So let's look at an example. So if you have a thousand employee company, about $10,000 per employee per year on the health plans, that's going to be about $10 million. Typically a group has about 80% of their spend in medical, 20% in pharmacies. That's going to be $88 million in medical spend. And then about 40% of a group's plan is often going to be spent on these outpatient procedures and services, et cetera. So if you take 0.4 times the 8 million, that gets you to 3.2 million. And then if you divide that by 12, you're looking at roughly $267,000 a month on your outpatient spend.

And if that surges by 50%, then you might be, or 20%, you might be looking at an extra $50,000. And overall, in the course of your $10 million spend, maybe that's not a huge amount. But something tells me that if you're the CFO of a thousand person company and you just randomly had this $50,000 expense, you want to know what it is and why. Okay. Now, forget about the money. Let's just talk about quality. So in elective surgery, there's something that's called the weekend effect, which is there are people and studies that show that the outcomes for an elective surgery are actually worse as we approach the weekend.

So there's actually a study, there was a meta-analysis where they literally looked at over 5 million elective surgeries and they found that the mortality rate got worse through the course of the week. So in other words, if your surgery was done on a Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday, your mortality was about the same. But if that surgery was done on a Thursday, the mortality rate was 12% higher compared to those first three days of the week. And if it was done on a Friday, it was 24% higher. Now, these are not absolute mortality rates.

I'm not saying that if you have surgery on a Thursday, there's a 12% chance of dying. That's not what I'm saying. In fact, the mortality rate for elective surgery is less than 1%. There's one study from England that says that it's about 0.6%. Okay. So we're really talking about 12% more than 0.6%, right? So that's like not even 0.7%. Okay. And likewise for Friday, it's only 24% more than 0.6%. Okay. So these are relative risks, not absolute. All right. But the point is, is that as an employee, so what is it? Is there something inherent about Thursday or Friday or the weekends? Like are people just more prone to dying because of like the earth magnetic field on the weekends? No, of course not.

It's because hospital staffing is lower on the weekends. Aha. Over the holidays, like between Christmas and New Year's, for a lot of hospitals, the staffing during that week is like one week long weekend. But the staffing from Christmas through New Year's at a lot of places is the equivalent of a really long weekend. So my point being is that if people are, because of their deductible or because of not wanting to miss work, are waiting until December or the very end of December to have surgery, then they are potentially having worse outcomes.

And you could use mortality as a proxy for like complications as well. So maybe you're not dying, but maybe you're going to have a post-operative complication because of this weekend effect as well. Let me just tell you that I personally would not get surgery that late in December. I would not encourage any of my family members to get that surgery that late in the month of December. So this is a fact that is occurring on employee health plans. There are a variety of things that employers can do to address this.

That is beyond the scope of today's video. But I wanted to make you aware of this phenomenon and now you know. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

