Title: Employee Health Plan Case Study - Purdue University Keeps Trend at 1_ Per Year Since 2016_k-UGkDVVhXI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k-UGkDVVhXI
Language: en
Duration: 9:54
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is an employee health plan case study of success, where an employee health plan kept their trend at 1% per year since 2016. So I love sharing positive stories on A Healthcare Z. And this is a super positive story about the Purdue University employee health plan. And Purdue has between its professors and its staff and all the other folks that make the university run, they've got about 18,000 employees. And it was a gentleman by the name of Dean Jargo who brought this example of Purdue University to my attention.

So thank you, Dean, for doing that. Now, how in the world did Purdue University keep their trend at 1% per year? Keep in mind, the average for universities for their peers is 6% per year. They kept it at 1% per year since 2016. How in the world did they do that? They did it by, one, an on-site clinic. Of course! Everybody knows that if you want to control your health care costs and improve quality, you have an on-site clinic. This particular one is run by 1-to-1 Health. I have no affiliation with 1-to-1 Health, but they're the clinic that was so successful with a patient-centered medical home model right there on the university campus.

B, they used a tiered in-network benefit design where they had two tiers for in-network providers. Tier 1 had a lower deductible and lower coinsurance, and these were for high-quality providers who were also reimbursed in a value-based payment fashion, not just fee-for-service. They were paid based upon quality. And then you had in-network tier 2, which had a higher deductible and a higher coinsurance, who were reimbursed on traditional fee-for-service. Now, the tier 1 richer benefits were for the Franciscan health system, for the Lutheran health system, and for the Ascension St.

Vincent health system. Okay, notice, IU, the big 800-pound gorilla of hospital systems in the state of Indiana, which has a hospital near Purdue. IU was not in that. Now, IU is also sort of known for being super expensive. So just know that IU was not in the tier 1, lower deductible, lower coinsurance. Okay, fine. C, all the employees were on a consumer-directed health plan with incentives, where you got HSA money, but you got more HSA money if you went in and you had your annual physical and you did all your other things, too, to keep you healthy.

So they used incentives with a consumer-directed health plan. Next up. And finally, they carved out their specialty pharmacy from their PBM. Now, keep in mind, specialty pharmacy spend is 51% of a group's overall pharmacy spend. So in other words, they carved out half their pharmacy spend from their traditional PBM. Okay. So, those are the major things. They did some other things, too, but those are some of the major things that they did to accomplish this amazing goal. Now, what were the results? Again, I said their trend was 1% per year since 2016 versus the university average of 6% per year.

I'm sure that every single employer that is watching and every single broker-benefit consultant wishes their groups had a 1% trend since 2016. I guarantee you that Purdue has beaten 99.9% of the employers and the broker-consultants who are watching, which I'm not saying that to discourage you. I'm just saying there is a way. It can totally be done. Okay. Now, what does that mean in terms of actual dollars? The university saved $149 million over that period of time, and the employees themselves saved $50 million over that period of time.

Now, we throw out these dollar amounts, and it's like, okay, instead of talking about esoterics, give me some context for that amount of money. Okay. So if Purdue University took that $149 million, let's say they put it into scholarships. Well, tuition room and board at Purdue for an in-state student is $22,812 per year. Multiply that by four years, that means four years of a college education at Purdue for an in-state student is $91,000. Well, if you take the $149 million divided by $91,000, that means that Purdue could have offered 1,637 students a complete free ride to Purdue based on the savings from their employee health plan alone.

I mean, I don't know what Purdue did with the money, but they literally could have changed the lives of 1,637 Indiana students because of their health plan. Likewise, for the employees, that $50 million that was saved by the employees, if you divide that by the 18,000 employees, that's $2,778 per employee on average. Now, let's just say they sucked it away in their retirement, and they earned 9% per year, which is what you get if you just put it in an index fund. And let's just say the average employee is about 45 years old, and they're going to do that for 20 years until they're 65.

That means that by the time they retire, they would have $16,700. I mean, shoot, that's like a dream retirement vacation that they could take because of the actions of the Purdue health plan. Like, forget about Social Security and savings and all that stuff. That's another $16,700 in their pocket just because of what the Purdue health plan did. Okay, now, of note, it's not just financial, it was clinical as well. So their mammogram screening rate went from 52% to 72%. Their colonoscopy screening rate went from 28% to 60%.

I guarantee you that the majority of employers, if you looked at your mammogram and your colonoscopy screening rates, it doesn't even come close to what Purdue is doing. So who is the key, who is the mystery key person behind this? Aha, it is Candace Schaffer. And so I was, me and a bunch of other people on LinkedIn were able to interact with Candace Schaffer. And listen, hats off to her. She is the Senior Director of Benefits at Purdue. And she does what every good leader does. And she says, well, it's not me.

It's my team. It's my staff that really made this possible. She didn't really give the credit to her consultant. She didn't give the credit to her vendors. She gave the credit to her staff. So I'm like, okay, how many staff do you have? 26! Holy moly. Now, keep in mind, she's like, well, look, they don't just do benefits. They also do work comp. They also do retirement. Okay, that's totally reasonable, right? It's very common for the Director of Benefits to do more than just the health benefits. They do retirement and work comp as well.

That's totally reasonable. But at the end of the day, 26 people, even for 18,000 employees, is a lot of people. Now, she's like, they're super capable. I'm sure they are super capable. There are also 26 of them. Okay? Now, this reminds me of an interaction literally that I just had last week with the Director of Benefits for a 7,000 employee manufacturing company. And his number one reason for why he has not been able to accomplish more in his employee health plan is he has a staff of five. And he says, look, I got to do health.

I got to do retirement. I got to do all the same thing that Candace Schaffer's staff is doing. And it's just too much. It pulls me in so many directions that I don't have the time or energy or the man or woman power to devote to a high-performing employee health plan because I got five people for a 7,000 employee manufacturing company. So, okay, I'm like, okay, let's compare apples to apples. So, if you said, okay, well, if this manufacturing company was 18,000 employees instead of 7,000 and you had that same ratio, how many benefits staff would this manufacturing company have? And the answer would be 13.

If this manufacturing company was actually 18,000 employees and had the same staffing ratio of benefit staff to employees, they would have 13 members on their team. Okay? Purdue University has 26. They have double the amount. So, I think Candace Schaffer is absolutely right. The punchline of this case study is it is the internal team at the employer that makes this possible. So, all the employers out there, if you want to lower your employee health plan costs and if you want to improve the healthcare quality for your employees, you have to have that skill set yourself within your own organization.

It's not through a vendor. It's not through the consultant. It's through your own people. I was talking to a Fortune 500 company, head of procurement, and she said to me, you know what, Dr. Bricker? We just need to have this expertise internally at our own company. And frankly, we don't today. No kidding. Look at this. I have multiple, I'm triangulating multiple people from multiple organizations saying, look, if you have the internal team with your own expertise, and look, you've got to pay for the salaries for these 26 people, but in terms of your overall healthcare spend, it's nothing.

You're not spending $149 million on the staff for 26 people. You can't get something for nothing. You can't have a staff of five and expect to lower your health plan costs. So, employers out there, there is a way. It's totally doable. Again, another awesome case study of success. So listen, hats off to Candace Schaffer. Hats off to her team. Hats off to Purdue University. That's all I wanted to say today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

