Title: Employee Demographics - Why Amazon Care Will Fail_No6cuJRmISg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=No6cuJRmISg
Language: en
Duration: 9:19
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is employee demographics or as I like to call it why Amazon Care will fail. Now that's being a little harsh maybe why Amazon Care will probably fail. What am I talking about here? So as we've gone over many times in A Health Care Z the three top diagnostic categories that drive employee health plan spend are musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and cancer. And musculoskeletal is really osteoarthritis in the form of degenerative joint disease for the hips, knees, and spine.

Cardiovascular, heart attacks, strokes counts as cardiovascular as well. Often your diabetes falls in there too. And then obviously your cancers. Now what is the largest risk factor for all of those? It's age. Age. As we get older our bodies start falling apart. It's just how it works. And there have been specific studies around health care spend by age groups. So according to Health Affairs, I'll leave a link in the show notes, right? So for under 18 year olds in general kids are pretty inexpensive. $3,620 per person per year on average for that age group.

Now for 19 to 44 year olds it's $4,422 per year. For 45 to 64 year olds it's $8,370. It's almost double. So here they basically broke up the working population into like two age groups, right? The under 44 and the over 44. And the under 44 basically cost half as much as the over 44. And listen, I'm 45. Coincidentally, I get it. I'm right on the border here, right? When I wake up in the morning, like I'm hurt now. That didn't used to happen. So we punish our bodies amazingly with a horrible diet, with a sedentary lifestyle, myself included.

And guess what happens? In your 40s your body starts pushing back. And unfortunately you start getting things like osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease and cancer incidence goes up with age as well. So if we're going to look at employee health plans, then we have to look at the age of people at companies. Because age is the number one driver of healthcare spend. So the median worker age according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics is 42.5. So on workers in America, half the folks are older than 42.5 and half the folks are younger than 42.5.

Now, let's break it down by industry. Now, believe it or not, the oldest industry is actually the agricultural industry. Like their average age is like 49. Okay, but there's very few people, like less than 2 million people in America work in agriculture, right? So in terms of like industries that like employ a lot of people, let's look at them by age. The oldest government employees, the median age for government employees is 45.6. The next oldest, manufacturing, the median age is 44.4. Next oldest, education, elementary, secondary, colleges and universities, 43.9.

Also tied with for third is transportation, whether you're talking about trucking or airlines, what have you. 43.9. Okay, they're all above the 42.5. So I guarantee you that given that their age is older, guess what they have? They've got more healthcare problems with the underlying health of their employees because they're older and they've got more healthcare spend. Now let's look at the other end of the spectrum. Okay, hospitality. People working at restaurants and at hotels, they tend to be younger. Look at that, way younger.

So our median age is 41.8. Now let's look at software. Let's look at the largest companies in America by market capitalization, by industry. It is one of the fastest growing industries. Okay, average age of 20, excuse me, median age of Facebook. 28. Google, 30. Apple, 31. Microsoft, a bunch of dinosaurs over there at Microsoft with a median age of 33. Look at that, government, 45. Facebook, 28. Okay, that's fine. Let's look at the mother of them all. Amazon. Maybe at age 31. Guess what that means? That means that healthcare is not a problem for these companies.

Healthcare is not a problem for these companies because their employees are so young that their bodies still work. They're not coming apart. Maybe they got diabetes but the ravages of diabetes hasn't been taking its toll on their bodies for very long. They don't have osteoarthritis. They don't have significant cardiovascular disease. They don't have a high incidence of cancer. So, when we think about these companies, like healthcare is not a big deal for them. Like they might say it's a big deal for them, but when you put pen to paper in terms of what they're actually spending on employee healthcare, they're not spending all that much.

Which then begs the question, okay, we have the itch and we have the scratch. When it comes to healthcare, the itch is poor health and the scratch is the healthcare. What are you going to do about it? And so here we have companies, the tech companies, do not have a major itch. They don't. Government, major itch. Manufacturing, education, transportation, major itch point with employee health. Technology, not so much. Now, we just, we saw this in places like the state of Montana with the manufacturing company Sarah Graff whose CEO wrote the book, The Company That Solved Healthcare.

North Carolina tried to solve their state employee health problem. Cities and municipalities and school systems, they are all some of the most progressive organizations when it comes to trying to fix their employee healthcare spend problem because they've got the largest itch. Now, here's how Amazon Care fits in. Amazon Care was developed and is initially used at Amazon where the average employee age is 31. It's the complete wrong demographic. If it's trying to solve for the employee health problem for Amazon, it's not going to be applicable to these other organizations.

It's like building a boat to go across the ocean in a lake that's only like five feet deep, right? It's the wrong environment to be building the ship of change in healthcare. So, now, I'm kind of intentionally being a thorn in Amazon's side here. I'm trying to intentionally being the grain of sand irritating the oyster hoping that they can produce a pearl. But my point is that all these tech folks, they don't get it. They don't get it because their employees don't fit the age demographic profile of organizations in America that have a serious healthcare problem.

Okay. So, fine. So, where does that leave us? That leaves us where, and we've seen this, right? We've seen this at the virtual care company where I'm currently the chief medical officer. We saw this at Compass Professional Health Services and the like. We've seen this in the news where we have the technology adoption life cycle. Again, which I've talked about many times. Where you've got early adopters, pragmatists, conservatives, and skeptics. Where when you combine the itch of these types of organizations with an early adopter, then there's change.

When you get a Marilyn Bartlett at the state of Montana, when you get a John Torrinus from Sarah Graff, then you get change. And we're starting to see the pragmatists who are essentially the fast followers, right? The people who are like, aha, I'm going to do it because other people are doing it. And we see that not so much in these huge states because they're very political, right? But more in the local municipalities and in the school systems and in the manufacturing because they're, it's not as public a decision.

It's a smaller decision. It's a smaller number of people. And they can make changes. And you see in places like Colorado and Wisconsin that have very high healthcare costs, guess what their cities and their school systems have? They all have like on-site, near-site clinics. Okay? So my point for today is, is that if we're going to look at employer-sponsored health plan as a mechanism for change in America, it is not a monolith. It's highly diverse. And it's highly diverse as to the age and the health of the employee population.

And so for us to say that XYZ company is going to be a source of that innovation, that we need to look at the age of their employees and the underlying environment and health of that organization to see if they really are going to crack the code or if it's just a hobby. Because there's nothing that focuses the mind better than an existential threat. And to a certain extent, employee health for these organizations, government, manufacturers, education, transportation, like it's becoming an existential threat.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare to See..

