Title: Employer Healthcare High Prices from Medicare Advantage_KyuMIzPKQ0w
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KyuMIzPKQ0w
Language: en
Duration: 10:24
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is employer health plan high prices are closely linked to Medicare Advantage. What? Employers, Medicare, what do they have to do with each other? Well, there's a few big concepts that we need to go over first. First of all, employer sponsored health insurance prices are much higher than Medicare rates. They are 200 to 500% Medicare rates from Blue Cross, United, Cigna, Aetna. Now, those insurance carriers also have Medicare Advantage members, people who get Medicare through an insurance company.

Now when those insurance companies pay hospitals for their Medicare Advantage members, they only pay the Medicare rate. Maybe it's 95% of the Medicare rate, maybe it's 105% of the Medicare rate, but it's about the Medicare rate. For the facility fees, that's what we're talking about here, the hospital system facility fees. Okay. Let me give you a specific example. So for a total knee arthroplasty, a knee replacement, the Medicare rate is $12,539. That's what a Medicare Advantage person, if they go in and get their knee replaced, the insurance company is going to pay the hospital about $12,539.

Now, if someone with employer sponsored health insurance, they're 55, they go in for a knee replacement. The insurance company is, or the employer if they're self-funded is going to pay $50,156. That's four, that's four X, that's 400% of the 12,000. Okay. That's concept number one. Concept number two is the insurance carrier and the hospital, when they're negotiating their rates, they negotiate total contract value. So, the hospital system says to the insurance company, look, you need to pay us like X millions of dollars or X billions of dollars.

We need to get to this number. And we need to come up with a combination of rates that kind of get us to that number. Now, let's use a specific example. Let's say that there's five, an insurance company has only five members and two of those five members have employer sponsored insurance through their job and three of those five members have Medicare Advantage. Well, and they all have total knee replacements. Well then, the claims that the insurance company is going to pay out for the Medicare Advantage folks are going to be $12,500, $12,500 and $12,500 for the three Medicare Advantage folks.

But the hospital system says, look, that's a super low rate. That's the Medicare rate. And frankly, for these five members that you have, you need to pay us about $137,500. Somehow we need to get to $137,500. So yeah, we'll give you this little dinky $12,500 for these Medicare Advantage folks, but we've got to make up for it with your employer sponsored health insurance plan members. And the insurance company says, okay, we'll pay you $50,000 for a total knee replacement for every one of our employer sponsored plan members.

So there's two of those, 50,000 plus 50,000. So you add up the 50,000 plus the 50,000 plus the 12,500 for those three people. And that gets you to the 137,500. So that's the total contract value. And the hospital has gotten what they want and the insurance company has gotten what it wants. Okay, that's concept number two. Concept number three, why have such low Medicare Advantage rates? Like why is the commercial insurance company wanting 12,000? Listen, they could get to this $137,000. They could make them all the same.

Or they could make, instead of it being 12,500, they could make it 25,000. So why does the insurance company want to keep those Medicare Advantage rates so low? And it's because the insurance margins on Medicare Advantage are so high. Whereas the margins on the employer sponsored plans are much lower. What does that mean? That means that the insurance margins for an employer sponsored member are only $745 per member per year. Whereas the insurance margins on a Medicare Advantage member are $1,730 per member per year.

It's more than double. Okay, so the insurance companies keep their Medicare Advantage rates low. They keep them at the Medicare rate so that they can maintain that margin. Now remember, it's not just margin. It's also times the number of lives, right? The total earnings or the total profit that they make is the profit margin times the number of members that have that margin. Okay, so now let's look at that membership for employer sponsored members versus Medicare Advantage members. Okay, so for insurance companies, their employer sponsored membership is pretty flat.

So nationwide, it's 178 million folks are on employer sponsored plans. And like that number actually went down about a percent from the previous year. So that's not a growth market for them. They're not growing employer sponsored lives. And each individual insurance company, they don't really gain or lose that many employer sponsored lives in a year. It stays pretty flat. However, for Medicare Advantage lives, they've been rapidly growing. So 10 years ago in 2014, there were only 15 million people on Medicare Advantage.

And now in 2024, there are 33 million members. It has more than doubled in 10 years. So Medicare Advantage is higher margins and it's a growing membership base. Now, the number one thing that the insurance company, if they're publicly traded, what they care about is their stock price. And in order for their stock price to grow up, they've got to grow their earnings. So really the growth of an insurance carrier is in the higher margins and the growing membership of the Medicare Advantage lives. Okay, now let's go back to that total contract value negotiating table between the hospital system and the insurance carrier.

Now, especially after COVID, all of the hospital systems were like, look, we're going to, we need to increase the amount of money that you insurance carriers are paying me. Instead of paying me $137,000, now you need to pay me $150,000 total. And so what the insurance company does is they say, okay, well, we need to protect our margins on these Medicare Advantage folks. So we're going to keep them at the Medicare Advantage rate of $12,500 for the knee replacement. And so the hospital says, that's fine. If you want to keep your Medicare Advantage folks at $12,500, well, then you better really jack it up on the employer-sponsored insured members in order to get to that $150,000.

And the insurance company says, okay, we'll do that. So now it goes up to, instead of being $50,000, it's now $56,000 for a total knee replacement on an employer-sponsored plan. Now, why is an insurance carrier so willing to throw their employer-sponsored lives under the bus? Why are they willing to do that? Because you got to remember that 65% of members in employer-sponsored plans are on self-funded plan, where the insurance carrier is not taking risk on that $50,000 or that $56,000. So when an insurance carrier raises their rates on their employer-sponsored plans, they, as an insurance carrier, are not decreasing the margins on their insured members by much, because so much of that risk is borne by the employers on the self-funded plans.

So they essentially use the self-funded members and the self-funded member high rates to, like, pad the overall reimbursement to the hospital systems. Now, this then gets us to the final point, which is, for many employers out there, they've been beginning to turn to these direct contracts. Sometimes it's a direct contract with a hospital system. Sometimes it's a direct contract with an ambulatory surgery center. Sometimes it's direct contracts through, like, a separate vendor that just sets up direct contracts between employers and the insurance, the employers and the healthcare providers, the hospital systems.

So why is it that these direct contracts can then get favorable rates? Well, because when you're dealing with a direct contract, those direct contracts, they don't need to pad their total reimbursement by these super low Medicare Advantage rates. They're free from having to do that. And so what they can do as a direct contract is they can be, look, we'll do a total knee replacement for $25,000. And the hospital system says, well, shoot, you know, $25,000 is not as good as $50,000, but it sure is a lot better than the $12,500 that we're getting from Medicare.

So sure, we'd be, I mean, for the sake of patient volume, if you can give us patient volume, then yeah, we'd be happy to take patient volume at $25,000 instead of $12,500. And so that's why those direct contracts can get lower rates than the commercially insured plans, than the employer-sponsored health insurance plans, because there's none of that padding of Medicare Advantage that needs to happen. And so listen, as a specific example, look, there is an ambulatory surgery center that I've talked about before on A Healthcare Z called the North Texas Team Care.

It's in Mesquite, Texas. And for a total knee replacement, they'll do it for $20,000, right? Because they are more than happy to do a direct contract, because $20,000 is certainly a lot more than what Medicare has given them. So just know that when you, as an employer, are paying very high contracted rates, very high allowed amounts for health care services with a hospital system, just know that is because the insurance carrier is trying to maintain very low reimbursements on their Medicare Advantage members.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

