Title: Employer Healthcare Priorities_ 1_ Lower Deductible_ 2_ Behavioral Health_ 3_ Expand Virtual Care_Z6dlBq0nvcQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z6dlBq0nvcQ
Language: en
Duration: 14:27
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is employer healthcare priorities. So today's video is about the Mercer employer survey for the 2023 plan year. So the survey just came out. Mercer does it every year and they survey several hundred employers and they put them into three size groups. So under 500 employees, 500 to 5,000 employees and 5,000 employees plus and the majority of the employer respondents are 500 employees to 5,000. That's the largest cohort and then but they've got quite a few greater than 5,000 employee companies that respond to this survey as well and their answers are super interesting.

The A number one result of this survey is that 70 percent of the survey respondents say that their strategic priority for the 2023 plan year is for benefit enhancements. Okay so what is the healthcare priority of employers for 2023 per the Mercer survey results? It is enhancing benefits. It is not lowering healthcare costs. Now I will return to that point again at the end. So why? So they even have this great little um abbreviation for it that I've never seen before. They just call it A&R and of course that's attraction and retention of employees right because that is a huge challenge for employers today.

So as many of you know as of June 2022 the employment rate in America is 3.6 percent which is super low. So during the peak with COVID it very briefly went up to 15 percent and during the great financial crisis of 2007, 2008, 2009 it peaked at 10 percent. So an unemployment rate of 3.6 percent is incredibly low and you've seen for a long time now well over a year that employers have been having a hard time attracting and retaining employees. And there are signs all over the place as you drive down the road even still today for companies, organizations that are hiring.

They're trying to find folks. Okay so so fine. So the world of enhancement of benefits is very large. So that then begs the question okay well how are employers enhancing their health care coverage for their employer sponsored health plan. So what is the one of the biggest complaints that people have? Well health care is too expensive. So what are the employers doing? They're making it more affordable. In fact arguably the number one priority of employers in terms of enhancing benefits is just to make their health insurance coverage more affordable.

To make it cheaper in terms of the out-of-pocket costs for their plan members to the employees and their families. Duh! That's not rocket science. So we had this huge shift to consumer directed high deductible health plans from the great financial crisis to today where literally in 2007 it was only like two percent of employees were on our consumer directed health plan to now today it's upwards of 33 to 35 percent of employees are on our consumer directed health plan and now employers are saying hey maybe we need to dial it back.

So 41 of employers in the response are offering some type of lower deductible plan. In other words typically there's multiple plan options but they're offering a plan option at each of these particular companies that has an even lower deductible or even no deductible where it is copay only. In other words it is not necessarily an HSA compatible plan right because in order to have an HSA compatible plan the copays had to go away and they're saying look to make it more affordable for people let's get rid of the deductible and let's just give out copays.

Straightforward right? Just make it cheaper for people in terms of their out-of-pocket costs. Okay priority number two behavioral health. Of course we have all heard many times in the news and from many of our personal experiences with our families and friends as well around challenges with depression, anxiety, substance abuse etc. with mental health and so employers are have in the past and are continuing to address behavioral health in their plan membership. Now interestingly the way that they're doing it by far and away is through the existing structure of the EAP.

Now they're calling it which is the employee assistance program. Now they are calling it an enhanced EAP but no it is not some sort of like brand new category right so there's typically like these categories of benefits right so obviously there's major medical, there's dental, there's vision, there's group life, there's disability insurance and typically an EAP was one of the big buckets within that sort of menu of benefits that your typical company would offer. So there are the majority of employers that are offering some type of you know enhancement through of their behavioral health are doing it through an enhanced EAP through sort of that existing structure that already exist.

Now interestingly 62% of the responding employers are adding self-service technology resources. In other words websites, apps, etc. So what's interesting here is is that both of these the EAP and the self-service historically and then just because self-service through an app has very low marginal cost right I mean you just build the app or the website and then the marginal cost for each person to use it is essentially zero. So what do EAP and self-service? It's very low cost and so here one might argue that employers are addressing behavioral health but they're not necessarily spending a lot of money on it.

Okay next up, interestingly virtual care is the third priority in terms of an enhancement for health care or the benefits at an employer. So notice virtual care they don't talk about this as a cost-cause cutting mechanism or as a way to reduce health care costs. They look at virtual care as a way to enhance the benefits. Now when they say virtual care what they mean is beyond existing what they call telemedicine which is essentially the virtual urgent care model right where you don't want an appointment you just you know either call or you do a video conference you get some random doctor or nurse practitioner every time there's no continuity of a relationship they address your acute care need right there it's been around for over 10 years they even in the Mercer survey they say look at the end of the day everybody's got traditional telemedicine the point is is that virtual care offerings beyond traditional telemedicine and what's the A number one is actually the behavioral health so it's really just take and look what can be offered through the the quote-unquote enhanced DAP and offering it virtually and of course this grew out of the COVID pandemic with so many things being shut down and they're like oh well you can actually have behavioral health visits um so you don't have to travel etc and to a certain extent it worked out very well so they're uh the the majority of employers that are offering uh expanded virtual care offerings are doing that in the form of a virtual behavioral health offering now interestingly number two is virtual primary care now note if you dive deeper into the um mercer survey it is not a virtual first plan in other words it's not like you have to use a virtual primary care physician before you can access other health care services no in fact it says that that's the vast minority of virtual it's really just a virtual primary care physician option for people beyond their existing in-person primary care doctor or in-person specialist etc like they traditionally have through their existing employee health plan today so number four point that i want to uh talk about now is is what i said at the beginning which is look all of these things are strategies that are meant to enhance benefits the healthcare priority for employers for 2023 is to enhance benefits it's not to lower healthcare costs what do we talk about all the time on a healthcare z healthcare costs are too high what do you see in news stories all the time on the internet and on cable and on all these other potential sources that you watch for news healthcare costs healthcare costs healthcare costs healthcare is expensive healthcare is expensive healthcare is expensive aha when it comes to the cohort of organizations that pays more for healthcare than anyone else in america which is employers right so employers actually pay more for healthcare in america than the federal government or state governments it's larger than medicare it's larger than medicaid so for employers healthcare costs are not a priority and that's a real head-scratcher because also in the news you also hear about a lot of issues related to healthcare that are related to healthcare costs such as price transparency right so now health plans and hospitals they gotta release all their prices and yet and listen at the end of the day employers are not using transparency price transparency as a strategic priority within their employee health plans for 2023 like they're just not likewise they are not using the pbm for lack of a better term controversy now right the feds are going after pbms now large states have gone after pbms now for things like their spread pricing for things like their questionable rebates for question like their for things like their questionable fees for potentially increasing um the cost of prescription medication like look like nowhere here did it say that moving to a transparent pbm was the a number one priority for employers in 2023 it's not no again you hear about this in the news but as far as what employers anonymously say is where they're putting their time and their attention their money is not in a pbm so what's my point here my point for all of this is the market is not wrong customers are not wrong if you think that transparency and pbms or whatever healthcare cost things should be a priority guess what the customers that have the money i.e the employers don't agree and so the point is is that you gotta bend with the trend especially if you're a digital health company or if you're a broker consultant or you're essentially if you're talking with folks that work in employer-sponsored benefits at all like if their priority is affordability behavioral health and virtual care and you come in with this huge like healthcare cost reduction transparency pbms just know that that might be of interest to a minority of listeners but you're going to need to a lot to knock on a lot of doors because that is not the prior that is not the priority for the majority of employer purchasers as per their survey results now of course healthcare is huge employer-sponsored healthcare is an enormous market and you can say well even if you find like this little niche it's still large enough for a particular you know startup etc and that's totally true i'm not negating that i'm just saying that it's oftentimes especially if you're running a business where you need to charge customers and generate revenue it's often very helpful if you bend with the trend and the trend is in the direction of enhancement not cost containment i'm being a realist here as much as i would like to say look the exploitative relationships in healthcare the waste that's in healthcare that needs to be employers priority for 2023 it's not okay so i'm just calling spade a spade now this brings up the last point that i'm going to talk about today which is you're starting to hear rumblings about a recession potentially coming in the back half of 2022 or in 2023 now we have seen a change in employer healthcare priorities with recessions so during the great financial crisis is when employers pivoted to hsa and hra consumer-directed health plans where they were focused on cost containment activities because unemployment was up at 10 percent and not three percent likewise you saw the rise of health maintenance organization for employer-sponsored plans in the early 90s again when there was a recession and unemployment went up so note that employers are a little fickle they do make healthcare costs a priority but they don't make healthcare costs a priority when unemployment is low and the labor market is tight and attraction and retention is what they as an overall business need to focus on so this this brings up the really the sort of the fits and starts when it comes to employers as a force for change in healthcare because at the end of the day employers are not a consistent force for change within the healthcare system they're not and they probably are never going to be like until we quote unquote get rid of the business cycle we're probably not going to get rid of these fluctuations in priorities for employers and so that has very real ramifications for health insurance carriers health insurance brokers benefits consultants for digital health startups etc so this is the lay of the land for 2023 if you want customers that will pay you it will behoove you to bend with the trend with employers and that trend is enhancement not cost containment and that's the point i want to make today thank you for watching a healthcare z.

