Title: EMTALA Law_ Hospitals Must Treat ALL Patients Regardless of Ability to Pay_BR49J7kt4sU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BR49J7kt4sU
Language: en
Duration: 5:35
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is EMTALA and hospitals as insurance. Now EMTALA is an acronym and it stands for the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act and it is a federal law that was put into place in the mid-1980s and it says that hospitals must stabilize and treat all patients that come into their emergency department and come into their hospital regardless of insurance or ability to pay. Now believe it or not before this law was put into place in the mid-1980s hospitals used to dump uninsured and poor patients on public hospitals in medically unstable fashions.

So like if the patient couldn't pay they wouldn't necessarily take care of them if they just happened to show up at like random XYZ hospital. So the government put in place a law and said look if anybody shows up at your hospital and they are on desk door and they're deathly ill you cannot dump them regardless of their ability to pay. You have to take care of them okay. Well that's the law okay. That's how it's been ever since the mid-80s. Now think about those types of severe serious illnesses that come into a hospital like MI's which says a myocardial infarction that's a heart attack, a stroke, trauma like a motor vehicle accident, septic shock.

I mean not only do these people come to the emergency department but they oftentimes will need to be intubated and put into the ICU and their stay could be days or weeks or even months and those hospital stays could be hundreds of thousands of dollars each if not millions of dollars each. I personally have seen this where people have come in with no insurance incredibly ill and they have been in the hospital for a very long time. Now and by the way like stabilized like they were like unstable for a very long time like they were on teetering on the edge of death and unstable for a very long time and it was very expensive for the hospital and the hospital wasn't going to get paid anything.

Okay now why do I say the hospital was not going to get paid anything? Because this MTAWA is an unfunded mandate. So the federal government said to hospitals look you have to take care of everybody but we're not going to give you any money to do it. Okay so what does that mean? That means that all hospitals share risk and by risk I mean clinical risk. So in the community around that hospital there is risk of incredibly sick people that have no insurance and no ability to pay and guess who bears that risk? The local hospital.

And so that's why I wrote up here hospitals are kind of like insurance because insurance companies because they have to bear the risk of the health of the community. Now turn into insurance companies. Insurance companies are largely regulated at the state level. What do states require of insurance companies? They require what's called deposit requirements because insurance companies by definition take on risk whether it's an auto insurance company or a health insurance company for their especially for their fully insured groups and for their individual groups right? But when they take on this risk the state says but you've got to have x number of dollars in financial securities cash blah blah blah in order to be able to pay the claims right? Because anybody could just start an insurance company collect premiums and then when people actually got sick and required those claims to be paid they could be like oh we went out of business we don't have any money and they just went off and you know went to Las Vegas with the money or something like that right? So the point is is that the state requires the insurance company to have these deposit requirements or reserves.

Guess what? Hospitals assume community health risk as well. We just said that. They don't they're not regulated by the the Texas Department of Insurance or by the Illinois Department of Insurance. So what do they do? How do they acquire reserves to account for this public health risk that they have to take on? They get their reserves from employers. That's right we've said a gazillion times on this channel that Medicare doesn't really pay enough to cover the cost of care. Medicaid doesn't pay enough to cover the cost of care.

So where in the world is the hospital going to get money to cover all of these entire requirements? They get it from employers. Now if we put ourselves in the shoes of a hospital CEO like we're gonna try to accumulate as much reserve money as humanly possible from anybody who will pay it to us including employers so that like if there is like pandemic flu if there is a natural disaster if there is something that causes tons and tons and tons of very sick people to come into my hospital I have to take care of them regardless of their ability to pay.

So I better amass a treasure trove of money just in case that happens and nothing is gonna stop me as a CEO from wanting to acquire as much money as as possible to help me sleep at night because of that. Now I'm not here to offer all you know a gazillion solutions today but I will say at the end of the day maybe hospitals wouldn't feel the need to hoard money from employers if the government actually did some type of reinsurance or funding of MTAWA. So maybe that's the kind of health reform we should be asking for.

It's a thought and that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

