Title: Episode 3_ Damned If You Do_ Damned If You Don_t_ The No Surprises Act_H6xJiBNP2kQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H6xJiBNP2kQ
Language: en
Duration: 2:24
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Do you know what the No Surprises Act does to doctors? The answer will surprise you. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and I'm also a healthcare finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially, and that's why I've partnered with KnowMeHealth to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. The No Surprises Act went into effect on January 1, 2022. It forbids a doctor who refused to accept low insurance company reimbursement from billing a patient directly if the doctor saw the patient at a hospital that did accept the insurance reimbursement.

In other words, if a doctor chooses to be out of network because they think the insurance reimbursement is too low, then the doctor can't bill the patient if they practice at a hospital that is in network with the insurance company. Instead, the No Surprises Act requires the out-of-network doctor and the insurance company to enter into arbitration over payment. Sounds reasonable, right? There's a catch. The federal government created a benchmark price that is to be used in the arbitration as guidance. That benchmark price is called the qualifying payment amount, the QPA.

Guess what the QPA is? It's the same thing as the insurance company discounted payment amount. The same thing it pays in network doctors. The same thing that the out-of-network doctor refused to accept in the first place. So the No Surprises Act essentially forces doctors that refuse to take the insurance company discounted rate to then take the discounted rate as payment in full. You can refuse the low insurance reimbursement rate for your services, but you'll be forced to accept the lower reimbursement anyway during arbitration.

Surprise, doctors! It's essentially damned if you do, damned if you don't. There are solutions. Find some better payers that offer attractive terms that you can actually agree to in the first place. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker and this is Healthcare Uncovered, where we break down a broken system. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker and this is a broken system..

