Title: Ex-Anthem Executive_ 12 Rules for Healthcare _from the Inside__IB9EvyjrM00
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IB9EvyjrM00
Language: en
Duration: 7:42
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Dr. Sachin Jain's rules for healthcare. Now this is based upon an article that Dr. Jain just recently wrote in Forbes here in May 2020. And Dr. Jain is the former CEO of Care More Health and Aspire, which were sort of the innovative arms of Anthem that did a lot of primary care for the Medicare Advantage population. And they grew to be very large organizations and Dr. Jain, who not only went to Harvard for medical school and Harvard for business school, was at the helm of them.

And they were all about positive change in healthcare in terms of keeping people healthy, which is why they focused on the Medicare Advantage population. And so he worked so hard for so many years to change healthcare for the better in terms of increased quality, decreased cost, increased access, etc. That he wrote 12 rules for healthcare per his experience. Now, we're not going to go through all 12, but we're going to go through 6 of them. For anybody that is looking to lower costs, increase quality, improve access to care, I think Dr.

Jain's article and Forbes should be required reading. It's that good. I will leave a link to it in the show notes. Okay. Rule number one. People want healthcare to be the way it is. There's an insurance broker from Georgia who's very famous for saying, healthcare is not broken. It was made this way. It was designed this way. And Dr. Jain is saying the exact same thing. Healthcare is the way that it is in terms of it being incredibly expensive, in terms of it being incredibly fragmented, in terms of it having highly variable quality.

It is that way because specific people in powerful positions want it to be that way. Now, not only that, but for people that are not actively trying to keep it the way it is, there is what is referred to as willful ignorance that he refers to as well. In other words, they choose not to look at the things they don't want to look at. And I will give you a perfect example of that. Physicians don't like to look at the cost of healthcare. They say, oh, that's not what I deal with. That's the insurance, you know, bad insurance company or that's the administrators.

When the cost of care is directly impacting their patients. If you're an oncologist, the cost of the chemotherapy or the pill medication directly affects your ability to treat the cancer in the patient. You cannot turn a blind eye to that. Yet, through willful ignorance, that's exactly what many physicians do. No, Dr. Jain makes this the number one thing on his list as the rules for healthcare. Okay, it's not an accident. People intentionally want healthcare to be this way. Not all people. Again, certain people in powerful positions.

Rule number two, talk is cheap. Change is hard. Now, Dr. Jain himself said that he would write articles and he would give talks. And I'm sure you read articles in the newspaper or health affairs, etc, etc. And you hear all these talks, whether it be on TED or YouTube, whatever. Or even myself. Talk is cheap. I will tell you, actually making change happen at Compass for our 2,000 employer clients, 2 million members, was very hard. I am specifically going to sell individual health insurance policies on the exchange because I don't want to just talk about change.

I want to help facilitate change. And I can tell you right now, it is incredibly difficult. So, we should just go in with that expectation that we can talk about change all we want. But actually doing it is incredibly difficult. Rule number three, outsiders in healthcare are totally praised when they first come in. And then they leave and they are kicked on their way out. And he uses the example of Revolution Health, which back in 2007 was started by Steve Case, who was the founder of AOL. He had gobs and gobs of money after AOL and Time Warner merged, dot com, blah, blah, blah, blah.

He started Revolution Health with $250 million to revolutionize healthcare. Guess what happened? Very little. It was like, he said at Harvard Business School, it was like the hottest company hiring at Harvard Business School at the time. Guess what? We had a similar situation in Haven Healthcare, right? Two years ago, it was lauded as like these new entrants coming in on their white horse to save healthcare. And here we are today, the organization is in a huge state of flux because their CEO of Tugawana is leaving.

Okay? So, outsiders are often praised, but often it ends up as kind of meh. Okay? Rule number four, healthcare companies and healthcare services companies, technology companies, need to be concrete on their value creation and measurement. So, he talks about shared savings. And in my NaviHealth video that I just did yesterday, look, NaviHealth did this perfectly. They were very concrete. It was a hospital readmission. It was something that everybody could understand and that everybody could measure. And when you have these nebulous measurements like decreased healthcare costs trends, there are, the organizations, whether the employer or the carrier or the government, what have you, they're doing so many initiatives that you can't take ownership for overall cost trend because they're doing so many different things.

And so, they're not going to want to pay you for overall cost trend because how do you know that your solution was the one that influenced it? They don't want to do that. So, just be sure in healthcare that you have a very concrete metric that is very straightforward to measure. Okay, rule number five, no margin, no mission is a euphemism for profit motivation. So, oftentimes, this is one of the most common phrases in healthcare, especially not-for-profit hospitals. They say, well, no margin, no mission. And they talk about it as though focusing on their margin is a way to enable their business.

And he says, look, that's true to a point, but oftentimes, it is masking a true underlying profit-first motive. So, his point is, listen, do hospitals need to focus on their finances? He says, of course, but the point is, is that if you hear no margin, no mission, that should act as a red flag of what they're saying is not necessarily what they're meaning. Okay, now, last up, number six, relationships, interpersonal relationships, supersede careful analysis of capabilities and needs. In other words, it's not what you know, it's who you know.

And he says in healthcare that is incredibly true. And we've seen this over and over again, where healthcare solutions that just happen to have the right board of directors that are connected to the right people, whether it be within the government or within the healthcare industry, they become hugely successful. Now, was their mousetrap really superior? Not necessarily. Now, flip side, were there, quote-unquote, superior mousetraps that were not effective in the healthcare industry because they didn't have the right connections at the top? Dr.

Jane says, yes, that, too, is absolutely true. So, again, this is only six out of the 12. This is my paraphrasing of his rules. Again, I highly encourage you. Now, we all need to go in eyes wide open as we work to change healthcare for the better. And I think Dr. Sachin-Jane's list right here is incredibly helpful for that. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

