Title: Federal Government Policy and Healthcare_UKcUHL9Qx3A
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKcUHL9Qx3A
Language: en
Duration: 5:36
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing federal government control and health care. So of course, federal policy in regards to health care is in the news a ton. And so let's examine really what it takes to get federal policy to change in regards to health care. And in order to do that, let's look at what it takes to change federal policy, period. Now there was a fantastic study, a very famous study, by two professors from Princeton and Northwestern in 2014 where they looked at public opinion and policy between 1982 and 2002 to say, hey, what's the correlation between public opinion and policy? Do they correlate? And specifically they looked at it for the very highest income people in America, for the middle 50% income people in America, and for large corporate business interests or lobbies, if you will.

And they said, okay, well, how does policy match up with the opinion of those three different groups? And this is what they found. They found that policy is dominated by powerful business interests and a small number of affluent Americans. Now, what does that specifically mean? They specifically looked at elites, right? So those high income Americans and the large business organizations. And they said that, look, if those elites wanted a particular, if their opinion was that they wanted a particular policy to happen, there was a 45% chance of that policy actually happening.

Now, if they did not want a particular policy, in other words, they wanted to veto some sort of approach to policy, there was only an 18% that it would actually pass. In other words, their veto was fairly effective. Now, let's look at that middle 50%. Let's look at the average citizen. If they wanted something, if their public opinion was that they wanted something, there was only a 30% chance that it would actually happen. Okay, so the authors are not saying that if the elites want something, it's going to happen 100% of the time.

And if they don't want something, it's never going to happen. And they're not saying that the average citizen has no impact whatsoever, but 45% is 50% higher than 30%. And so this is not new news, right? We all know that money has an incredible influence on policy in America. This is not new news. And this study here really just helps solidify that. Okay, now let's talk about health care change. So the implications are, okay, well, if we want health care change to happen, then really it's going to happen if the political elites want it to happen.

Now, okay, so fine. So the other important point here is that in general, there is an overall bias to the status quo. In other words, in general, things don't change. So in other words, even when the elites want something, it's still less than 50%. It's not 100% of the time. So if we are looking for quote unquote changes in health care policy, the answer is it's probably not going to happen. And if we look at the implications of the Affordable Care Act passed in 2010, that was one of the most major changes to health care in decades.

And at the end of the day, we still have massive problems with health care costs and quality. So at the end of the day, absolutely there's expansion of coverage, but it didn't really change a lot about health care. It didn't change the cost of it. It didn't change the highly variable quality of it. So what do we got? The status quo. Now let's take a look at where there was dramatic change. And an excellent case study in dramatic policy change was for the 26th amendment to the constitution, which was passed in 1970, which said that people at the age of 18 could vote.

Now before that, the age was 21. And of course what was happening during 1970 was the Vietnam war where 18 year olds were being drafted. And in fact, over half the people, half the Americans that died in the Vietnam war were between the ages of 18 and 21. So here you had people going off to fight and potentially die and they couldn't vote. And guess what America said, whether you were rich or poor, elite or not elite, they're like, that is not okay. So at first they passed an amendment to the voting rights act.

And then they sort of solidified, I won't get into the details, they sort of solidified it with the 26th amendment. And all that happened in four months. That's unbelievable. That's the fastest a constitutional amendment has ever been passed. So now keep in mind the dramatic, I mean, these are literally matters of life and death, okay, that caused that four month change to happen. Now, so in healthcare, if we want to have federal government change in policy, then it either needs to be one, supported by elites or two, it needs to be so bad that essentially everybody supports it.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

