Title: Fee-for-Service Medical Payment as a Public Health Threat_7qmlFkQoBO8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7qmlFkQoBO8
Language: en
Duration: 4:50
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is fee for service as a public health threat. Now I'm about to make 90% of doctors in America hate me. I may even make a lot of my doctor friends hate me, but that's okay because this is important. Alright, so fee for service, oftentimes abbreviated FFS, creates incentives and biases that are just bad. Let's just take that as a given. Now, the Mayo Clinic does not have its physicians on fee for service. It has them on salary.

W.W. Mayo, who founded the Mayo Clinic, knew this back in the 1800s. Johns Hopkins, where I did my residency, has its physicians on salary, as do the majority of academic medical centers in America. The Cleveland Clinic is the number one heart hospital in America. The head of the cardiology department at the Cleveland Clinic is a Dr. Steven Nissen. He is one of the most famous cardiologists, even doctors, in America. If we work in healthcare, we have to know who Dr. Steven Nissen is. And there's a fantastic article from ProPublica and The Atlantic from 2017, and I'll leave a link in the show notes, that talked about over-utilization and doing too many procedures.

And Dr. Nissen has a quote in that article where he said, look, I've got over 12 cardiologists on salary at the Cleveland Clinic, and they get paid the same amount if they put in a stent or not. And he said he thinks that's a main reason why they don't have so many unnecessary procedures. Now, at the Cleveland Clinic, believe me, they have more than 12 cardiologists. He's probably just talking about the interventional cardiologists that actually put the stents in. Now, for one hospital to have 12 interventional or more than 12 interventional cardiologists, that's a lot.

Okay? But the point is, is that, look, you've got all of these places in academia that believe in salary. Now, at least you can say salary doesn't make it worse, because if salary made it worse, there's no way that all these places would have their physicians on salary. Now, in the employer space, Walmart has its centers of excellence. It's had them for over eight years. And in 2018, they started making them required for certain things, for second opinions. Guess what? All of those centers of excellence, which include the Mayo Clinic and Johns Hopkins and some other places, have their physicians on salary, not fee for service.

Okay. Now, what if we thought about fee for service like a public health threat? Like it hurt us? How could we deal with or address fee for service? Well, let's kind of address it the way we deal with other public health threats. So, like asbestos. Okay. Well, asbestos is illegal. Okay. So, you could make fee for service illegal. Now, at the individual employer level, you obviously can't make things legal or illegal, but you could, like, create a network or you could have your carrier create a network where all of the in-network physicians were on salary.

And if you were a fee for service physician, you had to be out of network or you could do a three-tiered network, what have you. Okay. So, it's not literally illegal, but you would at least make it quote unquote illegal in your network. Okay. Next up, smoking is a public health risk, threat. Okay. Smoking is not illegal, but there are required warnings on cigarettes. Okay. What if there were required warnings anytime someone did a search for a doctor on the insurance company's website and there was a big label that says fee for service physician versus salary physician? That would arguably be helpful.

Okay. Last up, what if we thought of fee for service like a germ that, like, invaded the brains of doctors and caused them to potentially do more tests and procedures than they should, as opposed to those doctors that were not infected by the fee for service germ? Okay. What would we do? You as a patient, you would want to protect yourself. Right. So, when we're around people that are sick and have germs, we don't like totally avoid them whatsoever. Sometimes we have to be in contact with them. What would we do? We wash our hands.

We might even wear a face mask. Okay. So, in other words, that would be like education. It's not a perfect solution, right? But we could educate the employees about the fee for service germ and what they could do to protect themselves from it. So, that is the point I wanted to make today in A Healthcare Z is that there are potentially incentives and biases created by fee for service that you, as an employer-sponsored health plan, would like to avoid. And here are some steps you could do to address that. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

