Title: Financial Toxicity in Healthcare Explained_efK_70c75-w
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=70c75-w
Language: en
Duration: 9:28
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is financial toxicity in healthcare. Now what is financial toxicity? It's an actual medical term that's used in the literature that has a specific definition. It is the negative impact of cost on cancer treatment on patients. Now, historically financial toxicity has been applied to cancer because cancer is so expensive in terms of the diagnosis and the treatment, the radiation, the chemo, the surgery, etc. But I think this really applies to all high healthcare situations.

You could have a gastrointestinal disease, you could have an autoimmune disease, you could have a cardiovascular disease. I think there's really financial toxicity for other diagnoses outside of cancer. Now, there are certain signs for financial toxicity. So one, patients will skip a mitigation dose to save money. Patients will not fill a prescription to save money. People will borrow money to cover the cost of care. People will refinance their homes to cover the cost of care. They will experience anxiety and depression because of the stress of the high cost of care.

They will skimp on food and clothing as a result of the high cost of care. And there was a video that a gentleman by the name of Patrick Moore shared that, I'll be honest with you, it's hard to watch. But it's specifically around financial toxicity for a 22-year-old man by the name of Cole who had asthma where his asthma inhaler cost $35 and his asthma was well controlled. And then when he went to the pharmacy to get it filled one day, instead of being $35, it was $500. And being 22, he did not have $500.

So he did not fill his prescription. And as a result, within a few days, he had a severe asthma attack. And while his friend was driving him to the hospital, he had a cardiac arrest in the car and he died. And so there is a specific, specific harm from clinical, from financial toxicity. If his prescription had stayed at $35, he'd probably still be alive today. Now let's, because financial toxicity is usually thought of in regards to cancer, let's look at financial toxicity as it relates to a very common type of cancer, like breast cancer.

And the degree of financial toxicity changes depending upon the stage of the cancer. The later the stage cancer, the greater the financial toxicity. So for ductal carcinoma in situ, sort of stage zero breast cancer, which is abbreviated DCIS, over two years, it costs about $72,000 in total. Now for stage one or stage two, it's $61,000 to $97,000. For stage three, it's $84,000 to $159,000. For stage four, which is metastatic breast cancer, it's $89,000 to $182,000. Look at this, well over $100,000 for cancer treatment that involves the biopsy to get the original diagnosis, the surgery for removal of the tumor, for the radiation oncology to shrink the tumor, or for chemotherapy, for ongoing pill medications that need to be taken after all of the initial therapies have been performed.

And so for people with employer-sponsored health insurance, then the average out-of-pocket cost for breast cancer is $5,800. And so depending upon who you are, some people may be like, well $5,800, that's not that much money. But keep in mind that going just from $35,000 to $500,000 for an inhaler could have severe financial toxicity. So the absolute dollar amount is not what matters. What matters is the dollar amount relative to the person's ability to afford it. So for many people, $5,800 is like, it's prohibitive for them.

It is financial catastrophe. And for other people, it's not as big of a deal. But the point is, is that it absolutely has potentially dramatic and severe clinical consequences. Okay, now, it's important to understand that one person's financial toxicity is another person's revenue. And there are many organizations within healthcare that are actively working to worsen financial toxicity. For example, hospital financial leaders are actually working to worsen financial toxicity every time they increase prices.

Insurance carriers are actively working to worsen financial toxicity every time they inappropriately deny services. PBMs are actively increasing financial toxicity by changing the tiers of medications on their formularies to more expensive tiers when they don't get the amount of commission that they want from the pharmaceutical companies. So they essentially penalize the pharmaceutical company by putting the medication on a higher tier if the pharmaceutical company doesn't give them the high commission that they want.

Additionally, pharmaceutical companies themselves actively increase financial toxicity by increasing the price of their medications and by creating patent thickets that elongate the patent protection for their medications much longer than the original time frame that was ever intended for a patent to exist. Now, the good news is, is that there is treatment for financial toxicity that everyone can actually use today. And that treatment is for a patient to discuss the financial difficulties of treatment with their doctor, nurse practitioner, physician's assistant, provider, clinician, you name it.

Because a medication or a treatment absolutely can be changed for financial reasons. And listen, at Compass we had experience of this over 11 years for 1.8 million members, where if a person has a medication that costs $500, then there is a very good likelihood that there is another medication where the doctor will have to write a new prescription, but you can change the medication to a less expensive one. So this is not, oh, it's so expensive, there's nothing we can do. No, no, no, no, no, no. There absolutely is something that you can do many times.

Now, in some situations you might be, well, so there is no alternative, I have to take this one medication, there is no other possible medication for my condition. Okay. I would argue that's actually not that often, but when it does happen, listen, there absolutely are financial assistance programs from those pharmaceutical companies, or it might be for a test or a treatment at a hospital. And you better believe that all of those hospitals have charity care programs. And so you absolutely can go through those things.

The answer to financial toxicity is not to skip the dose or to not fill a prescription. That is not, you might have to change the prescription, but those, and I would argue really the clinician needs to proactively discuss this with the patient. The clinician needs to ask the patient, look, is this going to be financially difficult for you? Aha. In order for that discussion to happen, then the cost needs to be known. The cost might not be known exactly during the office visit, but the point is, is that either the clinician's office better figure out what it's going to cost, or the patient better figure out what it costs.

Otherwise, in my opinion, it should be assumed that there's going to be financial toxicity until proven otherwise. It would behoove patients and clinicians to assume financial toxicity until proven otherwise, because that way you can do things like change medications, apply for charity care, et cetera, et cetera, so that things like this death don't happen. I mean, the video is incredibly hard to watch. And it, it just, it's hard. Okay. Now, finally, I will say that, look, and oh, by the way, all this advice comes from the Journal of the American Medical Association.

There was actually an article in JAMA about financial toxicity. And they said, look, also patients need to understand their coverage. Okay. Listen, you try to understand your coverage. You read the plan documents. You call up the insurance company. You think you can understand the coverage. Good luck. Okay. The vast majority of normal people cannot understand their coverage. So I think it's perfectly reasonable, frankly, for a person to call the HR department or call the HR department of their spouse and ask the HR department to explain it to them.

And then you're going to get a phone tree and they're going to send you the head of benefits and that head of benefits might even send you to the broker consultant. And that's fine. But I would argue that if you don't understand, you don't stop, you then contact HR. Now probably every HR department in America is going to hate me for saying that, but I think that's the right place to go to get these answers and to avoid financial toxicity. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z.

very soon. from.

