Title: Full-Risk Primary Care Described in _The Calling_ by Drs. Chris and Gordon Chen_ZNvJJmFGWfo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZNvJJmFGWfo
Language: en
Duration: 10:38
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare. Today's topic is a book review of The Calling by Drs. Chris and Gordon Chen. Now I just listened to this book on audiobook and it is fantastic. I highly encourage you to listen to or read this book. I have no association with the Chens or ChenMed but it's essentially the story of their family and of the creation and expansion of ChenMed. And I've spoken about ChenMed previously on A Healthcare Z. I will leave a link in the description of my previous ChenMed videos.

But something particular about the way ChenMed operates came about in this book and I want to share that with you. So, as many of you know, ChenMed is a full risk primary care practice that has Medicare Advantage patients. By full risk meaning that they get a set amount per patient and all of the patient's healthcare costs need to be paid for with that set amount that's given to the primary care physician. So the primary care physician uses that to pay for the doctor and the nurses and the med techs and everybody to take care of the patient.

But then it also needs to pay for the medications. It needs to pay for any hospitalizations they have. It needs to pay for any surgeries they have. So, full risk means the primary care practice is fully responsible for the overall spend for that Medicare Advantage patient for the year. Now, they started out in Miami with Humana, which of course many of you know is a huge Medicare Advantage health insurance company across America. And then they expanded then to Virginia. And since then they've expanded beyond just a relationship with Humana.

So they actually get Medicare Advantage patients from other commercial insurance companies as well. They're in 12 states. They have actually over a hundred clinics now. They have thousands of employees. It is a huge operation. Now, what is the secret to their success? They've been hugely successful at keeping Medicare Advantage patients healthy. And prolonging their lives and improving the quality of their life. What is their secret sauce? And this book, The Calling, really boils down their secret sauce. And that secret sauce is that their patient panel size, so one primary care doctor takes care of 450 patients.

Now, your typical patient panel that a primary care physician takes care of is upwards of 3,000 or more patients. So 450 patients allows that one primary care doctor to see their patients approximately monthly, right? So, the original Dr. Chen, so the father of Dr. Chris and Gordon Chen, the original Dr. Chen was the one who started ChenMed. He's like, okay, I can see about 20 patients a day, 20 patients over an eight hour day. And if there's 22 working days in a month, and if you take the 20 per day times the 22, that means that I can see all of my patients once a month if I have about 450 patients.

And so, it's that monthly visit. No matter what, patients doing just fine. They still come in and see them once a month. That monthly visit is really the secret sauce to the success of ChenMed. It's almost like sacred. And oh, by the way, that's one visit a month at minimum. Some of the patients, they see once a week. Some patients, they see every day, depending upon the circumstance. Okay. As part of that, so tremendous access, right? The patients have tremendous access to their physician. It goes beyond that. All 450 patients have the personal cell phone number of the doctor.

So, they can call them at any time. Now, again, if a patient is just discharged from the hospital with a congestive heart failure exacerbation, then that doctor might talk to or even see the patient daily for a few days. And then they might say, okay, well, maybe I'll see you once a week for a few weeks. And then only then, after I've seen you daily and I've seen you weekly, am I okay with then potentially seeing you monthly. So, those frequent interactions, okay? Like, it's not rocket science. It's just repetition, repetition, repetition.

Frequent interactions with the patient. If a primary care physician has a patient panel of 3,000 patients, guess what they don't have? They do not have frequent interactions with their patients, which by definition does not work. This 450, because in the book they even said, look, we tried to expand it. We tried to make it 500, 550, 650. They actually tried to increase it. Guess what? It failed. It failed above 450. It's got to be 450. It's got to be one a month. Now, of course, immediately everybody's going to say, well, you can't do that.

There's not enough doctors in America for one doctor for every 450 patients. Listen, they use physician's assistants and nurse practitioners. Other folks use physician's assistants and nurse practitioners, et cetera. Like, of course you're going to have to have additional clinicians other than a primary care physician in order for this model to expand across the country. Like, that's a good thing. Like, in no way, shape, or form do I think that MDs and DOs alone can make this happen. Of course not. They don't even think that.

So, next up, those frequent interactions. Here, okay, so it's not just, hey, we're in the same room. If we're just in the same room monthly, then it's like magic. No, of course not. Two things need to happen with those frequent interactions. One, trust has to be developed between the patient and the doctor. Why is that trust so important? Because the ChenMed doctors need the patient to call or see them before they go to the ER. They need to trust that doctor enough. They need to know that they can call them anytime so that they don't just go to the ER.

The key to controlling costs for ChenMed patients is to decrease ER visits and hospitalizations. They have decreased ER visits and hospitalizations by 30 to 50 percent. Okay? They estimate that each hospitalization costs about $15,000. So, basically, the ChenMed doctors do whatever they can to keep the patient out of the hospital. Now, if the patient doesn't trust the doctor, they're just going to go to the ER. If the doctor is not available, they're just going to go to the ER. So, yes, they're available. Yes, they've got their cell phone number.

But in the book, they talk about how it takes a long time that in some of their communities, I mean, they're in New Orleans, they're in Chicago, they're in Houston, they're in Georgia, they're in Georgia, they're in all over the country, that sometimes it takes over a year of a physician working with a patient to actually establish that trust so that the patient calls them first. Okay? So, it's hugely important. Number two, those frequent visits allow for accountability. Those frequent check-ins with the patient allow the patient to say, Hey, we talked about you not pouring salt on your food anymore.

How's that been going? And to see them over and over and over again, and not just say, Well, I told you once to not put salt on your food. Like, that's not how it works. By having the frequent check-ins, the frequent visits, the frequent phone calls with the patients, it allows for behavior change and medication adherence. Because with chronic diseases, like just being in the room with a doctor isn't going to treat your chronic disease, right? You need to have either, the patient either needs to, well, it's really both.

The patient needs to, one, change their behavior, and two, they need to biochemically alter their body through the use of medications. Like, biochemically alter their body in a positive way. I mean, blood pressure medications are fantastic, okay? Blood pressure medications biochemically alter our bodies in a wonderful way. I mean, poor FDR, when he was president, he died of a stroke, and his blood pressure was like 240 over 140. It was, FDR's blood pressure was ridiculously high. If only FDR could have had blood pressure medication, okay? So the biochemical alteration of our bodies through medication, like, that's a good thing.

Like, we want that, okay? So, this accountability allows for the behavior change and the medication adherence that actually, like, makes people better. Again, just being in a room with somebody doesn't make them better, right? You've got to have the patient change their behavior, you've got to have them take their medication. Okay, now, so, the frequent visits that establish trust and accountability is the secret sauce of ChenMed. And, doctors Chris and Gordon Chen have shared that openly in the calling.

They've spelled it out for us. This is hugely relevant for what is referred to as the retailization of primary care. Where we see where Walmart and One Medical and Amazon and Oak Street and CVS and Optum, they're buying all of these primary care clinics. And, they're partnering with all of these retail outlets. Or, in the case of Walmart, they're starting their own retail outlets. Okay? Primary, again, just being in a room with a primary care, just seeing a primary care physician does not magically work. It has to be frequent visits with the same doctor, establishing trust and accountability.

So, ChenMed, again, lowered hospitalizations and ear visits by 30 to 50%. ChenMed lowered congestive heart failure hospitalizations by 70%. ChenMed lowered strokes by 22%. The retailization of primary care will fail. It will not decrease hospitalizations. It will not decrease CHF hospitalizations. It will not decrease strokes unless it has small patient panels, frequent visits that establish trust and accountability. So, just know that you hear all this buzz in the news. But, what goes on in that patient room is the determining factor of success versus failure.

And, the doctors, Chen, have perfectly explained this in their book, The Calling. And, that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

