Title: Get Serious About Healthcare Costs_yZaELrrRPos
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yZaELrrRPos
Language: en
Duration: 9:56
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is getting serious about healthcare costs. So, I was speaking with the CEO and founder of a vendor that works with self-funded employer plans a few weeks ago. He said something super interesting. Now this company has been very successful in helping their employer customers lower their healthcare costs much better than their comparable peers out there. I said, how do you do it? And he said, look it's really by avoiding low-value specialist care.

Like that's the trick. That's how we do it. And I'm like, you know what? That's exactly the same thing that we saw at Compass. And I looked at gobs of claims for our self-funded employer clients as well and it was the same thing. And so, if you as an HR professional or a broker benefit consultant or if you're a CEO or CFO, if you're like, hey, I want to get serious about healthcare costs. Now that's a legitimate question. Not everybody wants to get serious about healthcare costs, but if you're like, look, we got a problem.

Our healthcare costs are like, they're gotten to a point where we're serious now. Okay, we're serious, right? What are we going to do? Okay, the first thing you do is you look at your low-value specialist care. And what do I mean by low value? There's a very simple equation. Many of you are familiar with it, right? It's quality divided by cost. So, low value is when the quality is low or when the cost is high in the denominator or both, right? And so, of course, we have to create like a two-by-two matrix here, right? So, you've got quality at the top and cost on the side.

And so, you have high and low and high and low. And so, obviously, the best case scenario is when you have high quality and low cost. So, those are your A medical providers, doctors, hospitals, physical therapists, etc. Now, two, then you've got high quality, but high cost. Those are your Bs, right? You still want high quality first, right? So, those are your Bs. And then you have low quality and low cost. Those are your Cs. And then you have the worst combination of all, which is low quality and high cost. Now, by high cost, again, another equation that many of you are familiar with is healthcare costs are the number of units times the cost per unit.

So, high cost here is either going to be because they have a very high allowed amount, so a very high cost per unit, and or they just have a very high number of units. They like do, for like this particular disease, they might do like a ton of procedures or prescribe, you know, a ton of medications or have, you know, gobs of imaging, right? So, they're not very, you know, they have huge resource utilization for a particular diagnosis or a particular patient, right? So, high cost is a combination of high allowed amount plus high utilization as well, right? So, we apply this specific framework now because if we're going to get serious about healthcare costs and we're going to get serious about low value specialists, we want to specifically look at the low value specialists for high cost claimants, right? Because of the 80-20 rule or the 550 rule, right? 50% of your cost is in your top 5% of your claimants, 80% of your cost is in your top 20% of your claimants.

So, you don't care about this for like all your specialists, you care about this for specialists for high cost claimants. So, each self-funded employer, I'm going to tell you specifically how to do this again, because we used to do this at Compass. Now, you have to get your own data in order to do this. And what you do is you want to examine your high cost claimants, not just for the previous year, but if you can get multiple years in the past, typically we would get two, but if you can get three or four, that's even better.

And I'm going to give you now the specific fields you want to look at in your data. Okay. So, for and by high cost claimants, I typically mean folks with either greater than a hundred thousand or greater than 50,000 in claims over a 12 month period of time. And that's going to be a combination of medical and pharmacy. So, what you want to get is the NPI number, which is the specific identifier for the doctor, plus the doctor's name, plus the tax ID for the facility, plus the name of the facility, plus the allowed amount.

And a lot of times the carrier TPA, wow, we can't give you a lot of amount. Fine. Give me paid amount and member responsibility. And if they won't give you a member responsibility, like fine, just give me plan paid amount. That's close enough. Like again, it's the allowed amount is going to be the plan paid plus the member responsibility. And if they're like, oh, well, we can't get you both and we can't add them together or whatever, then just take the plan paid amount. It's close enough. Okay. Now the diagnosis codes associated with each one of those claimants and the data service.

Now, note, you're going to do this for each of your high cost claimants and for each date of service. So what you're going to end up with is it's literally just on an Excel spreadsheet where each of the tabs, there's going to be a separate tab for each one of the high cost claimants. So let's just say you've got five high cost claimants, right? You've got five tabs, one, two, three, four, five tabs. Maybe it's 50 tabs, depending upon the size of your group, right? And then for each date of service, and you're going to arrange this by chronological date of service.

So you're not going to arrange it by the dollar amount. You're not going to arrange it by the diagnosis. You want it in chronological because you use the, and each row is a date of service. So if you had a person with cancer, the first row might be like an office visit. And so it'll be like low, it'll be like low dollar, right? And the next visit might be like imaging on a separate day of service. And then the next visit after that might be another office visit, and then another office visit. And then you might get a hospitalization for surgery, or it might be an outpatient surgery.

So you want each row to be a date of service. And you want these fields, these columns for each one of those dates of service. And they tell you a story. And this is where I would argue a physician or a clinician can add the most value to an employer sponsored health plan, because I can look at those columns and I can look at those rows and they tell me a story about each one of those high cost claimants. And I can basically tell from looking at those rows and those columns and that story that's created for all those dates of service for those high cost claimants.

And I can tell, look, was this the standard of care? Now, I don't have some sort of special magical abilities. It doesn't have to be me. You can have another doctor do this. You could have whomever, right? But if, if there's going to be a quote unquote, like, medical doctor involved in providing value to a plan, in my opinion, this is the best way to do it. So there's consulting firms out there and there's brokerage out there that have doctors. You need to ask them to do this. Like, this is the number one thing that they can do to help a self-funded plan.

Okay, because you're going to look at it and you're going to be like, okay, this is standard of care. So what you're doing then is you're identifying the low quality specialists associated with high cost claimants. And you use this. Here's the solution part. Here's how you apply this. You apply this going forward. You're not going to be able to fix the high cost claimant that's already in your claims, that's already seeing that low value specialist. The train's already left the station. There's almost nothing you're going to do about that.

That's not the point. The point is for future high cost claimants, because employees reuse specialists. We would see this over time. You'd be like, oh, we would see them reuse the same orthopedic surgeons. You would see them reuse the same cardiologist. You would see them reuse the same oncologist because the employees talk to each other and like, well, who did you go to and who did you go to? And it's familiarity bias. And listen, they could still be like, hey, yeah, you should go to see this person. And they're a low value because they don't know.

A patient can't really judge value. They could be a, the patient can't judge standard of care. They could be a low value specialist. And absolutely. I have seen self-funded employers with 250 specialists that reused orthopedic surgeons. And I have seen, um, much larger employers that transportation company that used kept reusing the same oncologists in Florida who they shouldn't necessarily been using. Okay. So the point is, is that you're identifying who's the standard of care and then who is not following the standard of care? Who are the low value specialists that are not following the standard of care? What's an example of that? Somebody has colon cancer and depending upon the stage, it might actually be better for them to have what's referred to as neoadjuvant radiation, where you actually get radiation and you zap the tumor first to shrink it before you perform surgery on it.

And you look at it and the person had surgery first because the surgeon was too quick to take them to the OR and they didn't do what the standard of care was, which is to do the neoadjuvant radiation before taking them to the OR. You can see that. And you can be like, look, that's a low value surgeon there because they totally dropped the ball on what they should have done. And so you're going to be like, look now through various mechanisms, which is outside of the scope of today's video, whether it be through primary care, then you're going to steer your members or through plan design, you're going to steer your members or through navigation services, you're going to steer your members or through senators of excellence, you're going to steer your members.

You're noticing a theme here. Okay. If you're going to get serious about healthcare costs, it has to involve steerage. And I'll make another video about specifically how you do the steerage with all these specific strategies, but it's identifying low value specialists. It's identifying them for your high cost claimants and then it's applying steerage. So if you want to get serious, that's what you got to do. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

