Title: Great Resignation and Employee Benefits_ 20 Million Americans Leave Their Jobs_ Impact on Benefits_Nwy6eSzYVcw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nwy6eSzYVcw
Language: en
Duration: 7:33
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is the great resignation and its impact on employee benefits. So this video comes from a lot of data from a recent 60 minutes article or story I should say that is actually based upon a bunch of LinkedIn data. All of you know I love LinkedIn so this is a treasure trove of fantastic information about the great resignation which I'm sure many of you are already know about. So what is the great resignation? So 20 million workers have quit their job in the last six months of 2021.

In other words July through December of 2021 last year 20 million people quit their jobs. They only started keeping track of the statistics 20 years ago and this is by far the highest it has ever been. The quit rate is the highest it's ever been hence the name the great resignation or the great quit. So now obviously when people quit their job it leaves unfilled job positions. So let's look at the percent of jobs unfilled by industry. So in education 4.4 percent of all job positions are unfilled. In retail 6.3 percent of job positions are unfilled.

In healthcare 8.2 percent of job positions are unfilled. And the highest industry is hospitality hotels and restaurants were 8.9 percent almost 10 percent almost one in every 10 positions in hospital or excuse me hotels and restaurants is unfilled. Now as a result of that in the past year the hourly wage is the highest it also has ever been for hospitality workers. It's now $18.70 an hour which is up 11 percent from the previous year. So obviously with the laws of supply and demand if there is need for more workers one of the things you gotta do is you gotta pay them more.

So we're already seeing wages go up for hospitality workers. Now this wage increase needs to be put in context. So your typical hospitality worker makes $651 per week. Now keep in mind for the labor force in general the average weekly wage is $837. So that is 30 percent more than what hospitality workers make. So in other words hospitality workers are they're low paying jobs. So go figure that one of the lowest paying sectors of the economy has the most jobs that are unfilled and so the wages are going up as a result of that.

Now another important dynamic about hospitality work is that 34 percent of hospitality positions are part-time and that is super high. So if you compare it to the over overall labor force only 15 percent of all workers work part-time. So it's it's a lot more than double the amount of part-time work in hospitality. And you kind of think about that right if you think about people that might be working at a front desk at a hotel or that might be working as a waiter or even as a manager at a local restaurant that they're working part-time and not full-time a lot of the time.

So the one of the other big trends that LinkedIn points out to 60 minutes in their expose about the great resignation is that remote work has obviously changed dramatically as well. Where pre-pandemic only one in every 67 job listings was for a remote position where you could work at home. Whereas now one in every seven jobs offered is remote. That is an increase from 1.5 percent of all positions to 15 percent of all positions. In other words it is a 10x increase in being able to work remotely. Now what they also found was that workers were 2.5 more times, 2.5 times more likely to apply to a job if it was remote than if it wasn't remote.

So in other words being remote is more attractive for people. Go figure. So what you have here as the result of the great resignation with 20 million people leaving their jobs is employers are trying to do things to lure people in. So what are they doing? They're increasing wages. Talk about here for the hospitality workers. 2. They're increasing flexibility. You can almost, in terms of the remote working, you can almost think of that as like a lifestyle benefit. Okay so they're paying them more. They're giving them a better lifestyle.

I mean I think the average commute time in America is like 30 minutes each way. So like by working at home you save an hour a day. That's a lot of time. Like if you have kids that is a lot of time. If you don't have kids that is a lot of time. So the lifestyle improvement from remote work is tremendous for a lot of people. Yeah and finally let's talk about benefits. And this really comes from, because I'm trying to put together what I'm seeing in the marketplace with what I'm reading in the newspaper and all these statistics.

So last fall I talked to about believe it or not it's probably about 120 different insurance brokers and benefit consultants and the employers that they work with. And guess what? They were telling me a lot of these things. But we were having specific discussions around benefits and health insurance and health care for their employees. And this is what they were saying. One, they were offering a lot more benefits to their part-time employees. So historically they had offered a variety of benefits to their full-time employees.

But they historically had not offered them to their part-time employees. And now I saw across many of those 120 conversations, and just in the past week I talked to like another 20 brokers and benefits and the trend is only accelerating where more employers and brokers and consultants are wanting to offer more benefits to their part-time employees in addition to just their full-time. In order to attract the part-time employees right 34% of these hospitality jobs are part-time. They need to fill those part-time jobs too.

Okay and then also that with this remote work dynamic the benefits also need to not be geographically limited. The benefits need to be not geographically limited. So employers are looking for benefits that they can give to their part-timers and also the employee can take advantage of no matter where they are. Because with all these remote workers the likelihood is that they're going to be all over the place. So I wanted to share with you these statistics around the great resignation and thank you for watching..

