Title: Haven Healthcare Did Not Fail... It Quit.  Learn Why That_s Not So Bad_vL0WAOv6ZzY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vL0WAOv6ZzY
Language: en
Duration: 6:41
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Haven Health didn't fail, it quit. Now as many of you know, it was recently announced earlier this week, here in the first week of January 2021, that the Berkshire Hathaway Chase and Amazon joint venture, which was a not-for-profit organization called Haven Health, which was set to sort of make triple aim stuff, make healthcare better outcomes, lower costs, better patient experience, and was sort of a meeting of the minds of these massive bastions of corporate America.

It was started three years ago. Its CEO was Atul Gawande, who's from Harvard, he's a public health researcher, he's a surgeon, he's one of the most famous doctors in America, super smart guy. He actually even left the company several months ago already as the CEO. He was no longer in the day-to-day operations, he was still the quote chairman of the board, it was unclear how involved he was, so it kind of looked like Haven was kind of falling apart. And you know, according to the CNBC article earlier this week that broke the story, it said that look, each of these three organizations kind of did its own thing.

They never really had sort of a cohesive plan that was coordinated at all. And I will tell you, listen, and of the other things that I've read as well from quote unquote insiders, it seems to be kind of unclear as to why Haven quit or stopped or whatever you want to call it. But I will say frankly, it's good that they quit. And I'll tell you why. And I made a previous video about Haven many months ago evaluating their conflicts of interest because they had some real big ones. Okay. So Berkshire Hathaway is the largest shareholder of DaVita Dialysis.

One of the largest, there's basically two companies that run the majority of dialysis in America. And it's DaVita and Fresenius. Fresenius is actually a German company. And DaVita, and I'll leave a link to my other video in the show notes, DaVita charges employers like $4,000 a dialysis session. And a person needs, with end-stage renal disease, kidney failure, needs three dialysis sessions a week. They're getting $12,000 a week. Guess how much Medicare reimburses for a dialysis session? $250. And DaVita even does things to intentionally keep people on their expensive commercial insurance as opposed to going on Medicare.

Now these people that have end-stage renal disease on dialysis, they actually are considered permanently disabled. And they can actually qualify for Medicare before the age of 65. So there's already a mechanism in place for employers to get dialysis patients off their health plan. Because it is so expensive for dialysis for employers that if Haven was going to lower health care costs, frankly, a great way to lower health care costs is to lower dialysis costs. Which would be in direct conflict with Berkshire Hathaway's large holding in DaVita.

So DaVita wants nothing to do with Haven lowering health care costs, right? So there's a huge conflict of interest there, right? DaVita wants to raise health care costs. DaVita wants to make health care costs as high as humanly possible, okay? And then the issue, too, was that Chase, in terms of its investment banking and its services, look, it had a lot of fit. It probably was lending money and involved in an investment banking, all sorts of things, with a bunch of other companies that were trying to raise health care costs as well.

Whether it be these private equity firms that buy air helicopter companies, what have you, right? So the last thing that health care in America needs is a large corporate entity that has conflicts of interest. We've got enough of those already. We don't need any more. So the fact that we don't have Haven anymore with this conflict of interest, frankly, is a good thing. Okay, listen, and also, you know, the reporting also pointed this out as well. Where, look, joint ventures in general don't work. And we've seen this before, the sort of, quote, white knights coming into health care to, quote, unquote, save health care.

Like, they don't work either. The classic case of that was this thing called Revolution Health that was started by Steve Case, who's a billionaire that founded AOL. And after he sold AOL to Time Warner, or Merger, or whatever, and he left there, then he's like, I'm going to fix health care. And he started Revolution Health. And guess what? It didn't work. Okay, so these white knights, they just, they tend to not work. Okay? Now, how does it work? I'm not trying to be negative here. How does it work? Well, let's look at other ways where industries were, you know, potentially being, you know, detrimental to society in terms of maybe costing society and not providing a lot of value.

And so, and I'm not saying that about all of health care, right, but there are elements of health care that are like that. It's kind of like Big Tobacco or what was happening with Purdue Pharma and prescription narcotic pain medications, right? So how did Big Tobacco get brought into check? I mean, smoking rates are much lower now than they used to be. How did Purdue get brought into check? It's not totally done, but it's certainly much better than it was before. Okay? Well, it was lawsuits. It was major lawsuits by the states, by individuals.

I mean, it was a whole barrage of lawsuits. It was, frankly, it was regulatory changes, right? It used to be able to advertise tobacco to kids. They say, oh, you can't advertise tobacco to kids. They put all these regulations around it, okay? And it was also just public awareness, right? It was like, hey, smoking causes cancer. Emphysema, it kills you. Parents were like, I don't want you kids smoking anymore. There was public outcry against Purdue and narcotic pain medication. There was much more action by the FBI and the Department of Justice against these pill mills.

Okay? So the point is that it's a multi-pronged approach. And that's really the solution in healthcare as well. I mean, healthcare is not going to be unique in terms of its social change vis-a-vis these other areas. It's probably going to require a sustained effort over multiple decades across multiple fronts, as opposed to one discrete organization. Whether it be for-profit or not-for-profit, that doesn't really matter. The point is, is that nobody's going to come in as a white knight. It's got to be this multi-pronged, multi-decade approach, just like we've seen with other social movements as well.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

