Title: Healthcare Corporation Revenue Up 90_ After Affordable Care Act Passed_WmifI5cvLEI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WmifI5cvLEI
Language: en
Duration: 4:10
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing healthcare revenue and as they said during the Watergate scandal in the 70s, we need to follow the money. And that is what the reporters Woodward and Bernstein were told by their informants. So we're going to follow the money. So of course, everyone always talks about how healthcare costs are going up. Well, one person's cost is another person's revenue. And so we're going to go through the revenue for the six largest healthcare companies in America.

Now, these are groups that are on the Fortune 500 list. And first up is United Health Group, also known as United Healthcare and Optum. They're number six on the Fortune 500. And then I've listed their revenue in 2010. And I picked 2010 because that was the year the Affordable Care Act was passed. Now, and then comparing it to 2018. Now, United Healthcare had $94 billion in revenue in 2010 and $226 billion in revenue in 2018. In other words, they're up 140%. They have more than doubled since the passage of the Affordable Care Act.

Next up, McKesson, the seventh largest corporation in America, which does drug delivery to all the hospitals in America and the pharmacies, etc. Like, most people have never heard of McKesson. It's the seventh largest corporation in America. Okay, they were $109 billion business in 2010. Now they're $208 billion business. Again, they have almost doubled. Next up, CVS Health, the eighth largest corporation in America. $96 billion in 2010. $195 billion in 2018. More than doubling in that amount of time. Now, they have acquired Aetna.

So just keep in mind now that they are growing by, largely by, organic and acquisition. That's why I put the M there for merger. Likewise, for United Health Group, they bought a large PDM called Catamaran and renamed it Optimal Rx. That's why I put an M there for UHG as well because they also did, have done multiple acquisitions. Okay, next up, Amerisaurus Virgin. They do the same thing as McKesson. They do drug delivery for hospitals, pharmacies, etc., etc. So it's $78 billion business in 2010. $168 billion business today.

Again, more than doubling, up 115%. Cardinal Health, in the same business as McKesson and Amerisaurus Virgin. $99 billion business in 2010. $137 billion business in 2018. Up 38%. And Walgreens, the 17th largest corporation in America. A $67 billion business when the ACA was passed. Now, they merged with Boots, which is the large British pharmacy company. So now they're the Walgreens Boots Alliance. They're a $132 billion business. So they have essentially doubled as well. So notice here that four out of the ten largest corporations in America are healthcare companies.

And six of the 17 largest corporations in America are healthcare companies. Now, revenue is not just increasing for these organizations. It's also increasing for hospitals, medical device companies, and pharmaceutical companies. Doctors themselves are getting paid more. So we talk about increased healthcare costs. The money is going somewhere. And this is where it's going. So what's the point? The point is, everyone talks about how the healthcare system is broken. Well, listen. For these folks, the healthcare system is not broken.

The healthcare system is working great. So to say that the healthcare system is broken is that, you know, where you stand depends upon where you sit. So just know that these corporations are thriving. Like, not just going a little bit. They are thriving. They are consolidating. They are growing in power and influence. So just know that when people say healthcare is quote-unquote broken, it might be broken for certain constituencies like patients, which, oh, by the way, that's who it's supposed to serve. But for these organizations, healthcare is not broken.

So that's my point for today. Thank you for watching, A-Hop Care Z..

