Title: Health Insurance Self-Funding Across America_yqjBgHmf1BE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yqjBgHmf1BE
Language: en
Duration: 10:56
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

A map of the United States, obviously. Now, the green, the dark green areas are higher concentrations of self-funding. And the lighter orange areas are the lower areas of self-funding. And then you got the yellow in between. So you can see between North Carolina, Virginia, Kentucky, West Virginia, Ohio, and Indiana. I'm going to call that self-funding alley. That self-funding alley in America. Look how this area of America has a higher percentage of self-funded employers. Now, let's look at places that have low self-funding.

So California, obviously the big behemoth because it's the most populous state in America, is a very low concentration of self-funding. Arizona, low concentration of self-funding. Nevada, low concentration of self-funding. Let's also look at the lighter yellow areas as well. So we talked about, I talked about in a previous A Healthcare Z video about how the Northeast tend to have lower levels of self-funding. And you can see for very populous states like New Jersey and Massachusetts, they're small in geographic size, but they have tons of people.

It's deceiving, right? Because if New Jersey and Massachusetts, if the size of their state was comparable to the number of people that live there, they would be some of the largest states in America, right? So gobs of people live in Massachusetts and New Jersey, okay? Very light. Maryland also has a very high population. It's a small state. It's where I'm from originally, but it actually has a lot of people because it has the Washington, DC, Baltimore area. Okay. Now, also, New York is also lighter as well.

Okay. So in general, the Northeast is fairly low. And then when you look across the South and the Midwest, you can see that outside of self-funding alley here, you have areas like Texas and Missouri and Arkansas and Alabama and some of these other Southern states that have fairly high levels of self-funding. So it's important to know that there is a geographic difference in terms of the distribution of self-funding in America as well. And now we're going to go into the weeds on that. So now this is a busy chart, but I'm going to go through it slowly because there's a lot of great information in here.

Okay. So here we have the entire United States and the total employer self-funding rate, which here is about 58%. So it wasn't the exact same year as before. And then it breaks it down by companies with a hundred to a thousand employees and companies with over a thousand employees. And so as you can see for the entire United States, the self-funding rate is 42% for a hundred to a thousand and it's 77% for over a thousand. Now let's look at it by specific state and it breaks it down by geographic regions. Now you can see in general that the green for the employers over a thousand, it's pretty consistent, right? In most States, employers over a thousand are, have the majority self-funded, but you can see that there's a high degree of variability here for the mid-market employers, a hundred to a thousand.

And I would tell you that is where I see the biggest discrepancy for employers that want to be more cost conscious and efficient with the financial structure and the funding structure of their self-funded plans because self-funded plans are, are cheaper. Um, and they're, I mean, they're less expensive without compromising quality. And one would say that a state that is more aggressive in its self-funding between a hundred and 99 and other mid-market employers is sort of more focused or concerned about the financial performance of their employee health plan.

Whereas employers that have lower levels of self-funding in that age tend to be less focused on it. And I would say that there is a push and a pull dynamic there around self-funding for mid-market employers. What do I mean by that? There is a push for self-funding in that the employer themselves might be more interested in self-funded. What would be a push? The push would be if it is a relatively low margin business because low margin. So like the classic example of that is grocery stores, right? So of course, grocery stores are going to be self-funded because their margins are only like three or 4%.

They're super slim. And so low margin businesses are going to be very focused on cutting costs because they don't, they don't make a lot of margin to begin with. Whereas high margin businesses like software tend to be not as self-funded because they're just making gobs of money. And so they're not necessarily paying as much attention to the cost cutting mechanisms within their organization. Now, so that's, that's the push. That's the push by the employer. And then there's the pull. Okay. And the pull is that health insurance carriers do not want you to be self-funded.

So they make more money when you are fully insured, especially in the mid market. And we're going to talk about that on a later slide. So just know that part of the dynamic for why these mid market employers are not self-funded in their States is, is there something that the health insurance carriers in their States are doing to particularly encourage being fully insured and particularly discouraging being self-funded. Okay. Now let's break down the States. So you can see here that Massachusetts, and I circled a certain state to pull them out.

So you can see here that Massachusetts at 35% is well below the national average of 42% for mid market self-funded employers. Likewise, New York at 29% is also well below the national average for self-funding for mid market employers. New Jersey is also super low as well at 27%, but there's an asterisk here that actually says that the data might not be reliable. So let's just not count New Jersey here. Okay. Next, of course, we've talked about California on the previous map. So you can see that California has a mid market self-funding rate of 31% versus the national average of 42%.

Okay. So here you have very populous States of Massachusetts, New York, and California that have relatively low rates of self-funding. Isn't that interesting? What do you have in Massachusetts, New York, and California? You have very high margin businesses. The cottage industry of New York city is finance where the margins are super high. The cottage industry of California is software technology and entertainment where the margins are super high. In Massachusetts, again, you have lots of software and technology and biotech companies where the margins are super high.

So you have a lot of employers who are making so much money that frankly, they are not paying as much attention to being as cost effective with their health plan as other parts of the country. Okay. Now I underlined States that have particularly high levels of self-funding for mid market employers. Interesting there, Pennsylvania, look at that right next door to New York and New Jersey, mid market employers in Pennsylvania are much more likely to be self-funded 55% versus 29% in New York. I mean, it's almost double in Pennsylvania.

Pennsylvania tends to have lower margin businesses, especially Western Pennsylvania and Central Pennsylvania. They have a fair amount of manufacturing there. Okay. Look at this. Indiana, 67%. What do you have in Indiana? Oh, Ohio, 56%. What do you have in Indiana and Ohio? It is filled, filled with tier one auto parts manufacturers. In fact, Ohio has the second highest level of auto manufacturers outside of Michigan. So you have a ton of manufacturers in Indiana and Ohio with associated manufacturers that tend to have lower margins because they have to compete with offshore China, Latin America manufacturing.

So they've got to keep their cost structure low. And that's why they've been more aggressive in being self-funded in the mid market. Look at this. Iowa, 58% self-funded. Again, manufacturing in Iowa as well. Georgia, 59%. Gobs of manufacturing in Georgia. North Carolina, 61%. South Carolina, 61%. Gobs of manufacturing in South Carolina. And it's not just manufacturing. There are other lower margin businesses that are also located in these rural states as well. And of course, let's look at other just highly populated states.

So in Texas, it's at 44%. Okay. So it's a little above the national average. All right. And then if you look at other places like Illinois, Illinois is just a little below the national average, right? Because Illinois is a mix, right? Because you've got Chicago that has a lot of finance and law firms, some technology software companies. So you have high margin businesses in Chicago that are probably less likely to be self-funded in the mid market. But then you do have manufacturing downstate, whether it be Caterpillar and Peoria, but you've got a lot of sort of mid-sized manufacturers downstate in Illinois as well.

So it's a mix in Illinois. All right. So, and then yes, thank you for your comments here, by the way. So Michael's saying Nebraska at 79%. I think that's the highest in the country. Now I will say that Nebraska is probably a little bit of an outlier just because it's a very low population state. So you can see how, if you just happen to have a certain number of, you know, because the vast majority of the companies in Nebraska are in Lincoln and Omaha, right? So it's highly concentrated in those two places. I would add too, that there was also a social proof dynamic.

There's a herd mentality of employers. I mean, it's monkey see, monkey do. We all do this and businesses do this as well. CEOs talk to each other. CFOs talk to each other. Heads of HR talk to each other. And who do they talk to? They talk to people in like around them and they'll be like, hey, you self-funded? If you're in Massachusetts, no, no, no, I'm not self-funded. But if you're in Nebraska, you self-funded? You have 250 employees, you self-funded? Oh yeah, I'm totally self-funded. Okay. So there is that herd mentality, social proof as well..

