Title: Health Insurance Company Buys Doctor Practice... A Fable_5-0aoIVmCO0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5-0aoIVmCO0
Language: en
Duration: 4:57
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the multi-specialty practice and the insurance carrier. And so today's video is a fable. I'm sure you remember like Aesop's fables like the boy who cried wolf. Well, today's fable is the multi-specialty practice and the insurance carrier. And in this fable, it starts out with a physician practice that sells to an insurance carrier. And that physician's practice was a multi-specialty practice. They had primary care physicians and they had OBGYNs and they had gastroenterologists and they had cardiologists.

They had dozens of specialties. They had dozens of locations. They had tons of doctors. It was huge. And they just happened to use a vendor, which we'll call vendor A, to perform a certain service for their patients. And when vendor A performed that service for their patients, they charged $300 per patient per day to the physician practice. And it worked out great. The physician practice liked it, the vendor liked it, and the patients liked it. But when the vertically integrated insurance carrier bought the multi-specialty practice, they said, aha, we own a vendor that does the same thing that vendor A does.

And we are going to replace vendor A with the vendor that we own, which we'll call vendor I. Now, vendor I charges $800 per patient per day. Wait a minute. Why in the world would the insurance carrier replace the $300 vendor with the $800 vendor? Aha. It's because the vertically integrated insurance carrier can increase their revenue by increasing healthcare costs to other insurance carriers that the physician practice was billing and to employers in the area. Aha. But the story gets even better. So this physician practice, like many physician practices, had what's called an earn out when they sold to the insurance carrier.

And an earn out is when there are future payments from the buyer, i.e. the insurance company, to the seller, i.e. the physician practice, based upon future earnings. So the insurance carrier said, look, we're going to pay you in year two and year three and year four after the transaction, based upon the financial performance, based upon the profitability, based upon the earnings of the physician practice. So guess what happened? When vendor A, which only costs $300 per patient per day, was replaced by vendor I, that costs $800 per patient per day, it then decreased the earnings.

It decreased the profit margin of the physician practice. It worsened the financial performance of the physician practice. And as a result, the physician practice had a lower earn out. Or in the insurance carrier's point of view, the insurance carrier saved money. They didn't have to pay as much money to the physician practice in the future because they had decreased the financial performance of the physician practice that they had just bought. It's genius. So the moral of the story in this fable is one, vertical integration allows insurance carriers to make money by increasing health care costs.

So anytime you hear the word vertically integrated insurance, that doesn't necessarily mean that the insurance company is trying to lower costs because they've got all these vendors that they also own that make money by increasing health care costs. And moral of the story number two is beware of earn out tricks. Because in this case, by putting in a vendor that the insurance company made more money with, it worsened the performance of the company they just bought and therefore saved them tons of money in not having to pay out as much earn out to that physician practice.

So there's your fable for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z. three pants on? ..

