Title: Healthcare In-Network _ Out-of-Network Bait and Switch_8NDnQoTkjb4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8NDnQoTkjb4
Language: en
Duration: 2:42
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today we're going to be talking about in-network, out-of-network mismatch. So oftentimes in employee benefits in healthcare you'll see the abbreviations in and own and those stands for in-network and out-of-network. Now when a person goes to receive medical services they typically receive two bills, one from the doctor and one from the hospital or from the facility. And so the capacity for each the doctor and the hospital to be either in or out-of-network exists.

And so here we have a matrix where we have a hospital over here and we have the doctor here on top and we have in-network and out-of-network and so you can see you have a combination of four things that are possible. And so of course the best case scenario is when you have an in-network doctor and an in-network hospital. That's why I have that plus sign there. However the possibility exists where you can have an in-network hospital but an out-of-network physician. So this oftentimes happens with radiologists, anesthesiologists, and pathologists which is why many health insurance plans have what's called a RAPS policy which means that these physicians even though they bill as out-of-network they will be covered as in-network by the insurance plan because the patient was in an in-network facility.

However it's oftentimes unclear whether or not this applies to ER physicians because oftentimes an ER physician will be out-of-network at an in-network hospital and that ER physician bill will not necessarily be processed as in-network. So the short answer is is it depends. Now we also have the situation where you have an out-of-network facility and an in-network doctor. So oftentimes this happens with what are called proceduralists. So that would be like surgeons or like gastroenterologists that perform upper endoscopies and colonoscopies.

So this is where the physician will be in-network but the facility will be out-of-network. And this is particularly problematic because oftentimes it's the facility bill or the hospital bill that's much larger than the physician bill. So the in-network physician bill might only be like $250 but the out-of-network facility bill could be upwards of like $20,000 and we've literally seen that happen. And then of course you have the situation where you have an out-of-network doctor and an out-of-network hospital or facility as well.

And that obviously is a troublesome situation to be in from a cost perspective which is why I have the minus sign there as well. Now this is only an introduction to in-network and out-of-network mismatch but I appreciate you watching A Healthcare Z today. Thank you so much. Excellent..

