Title: Health Insurance Subject to Antitrust Law...CHIRA-Competitive Health Insurance Act Explained_xcu6bvj22fc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xcu6bvj22fc
Language: en
Duration: 4:18
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing direct contracting. Okay, so this is where an employer will contract directly with a provider for services for the employees or for their plan members. And it typically takes the form of what's referred to as a bundled payment where oftentimes it's say for an operation, the preoperative care, the operation itself, and then any follow-up care is all part of one bundled payment. Or it's just for a lower rate of a fee-for-service basis.

In other words, it's still based upon the CPT code and or the diagnosis code. However, just that per CPT code basis, let's say, is just less than it would be done through a traditional network. Okay, where have I seen this done? Typically it's for self-funded employers between 500 and 1,000 plus employees. Certainly are there situations where companies with less than 500 employees have done this. And certainly there's lots of cases where employees with greater than 1,000 employees have done this as well. Again, Walmart's kind of the most classic example of that.

The key thing here for those employers that are kind of mid-market is that they have fairly highly concentrated employees. And that's important because when the employer goes to the negotiating table to sit down with the provider, one of their main points of leverage is steerage. That they're going to provide more volume to that particular provider. And that's going to be one of the things that's going to induce the provider to then give that employer a better rate. Okay, where have I seen this done on the provider side? I've seen it with independent physician practices and I've seen it with ambulatory surgery centers.

And I've seen it with independent physician practices that have, you know, they tended to be primary care physicians. And there are actually some primary care groups that were actually out of network. They tended to be in smaller towns and rural areas. But by the employer having a concentrated number of employees in these smaller towns, then they prevented a ton of out-of-network charges that would have occurred had the employees been going to that group of primary care physicians. And then the primary care physicians got a lot more volume of patients coming to them because of this direct contract.

And then also with the ambulatory surgery centers as well, having that bundled payment ends up typically being lower cost. Not only because one of the, just the dollar amounts less, but that it also includes the preoperative care and then any, also payment for any complications that might occur as well. And again, a second piece of incentive for the provider is that they get paid faster by the employer. So typically a major carrier, that might take 30, 60, sometimes even 90 days to pay that provider. Whereas they'll get much more timely payment oftentimes as part of the direct contract deal.

Okay, next up. It typically needs to be administered through a third-party administrator. Now I have seen situations where a major ASO has actually been the TPA doing it. It's been super hard to get that done for a variety of reasons, but oftentimes it's an independent TPA. And oftentimes they have to set up what's referred to as a client-specific network or a CSN because they need to, in their system, know that for this particular provider with these particular diagnosis codes or CPT codes, what have you, that we're going to give this X allowed amount that's different than their typical rent-in network that they're using.

Okay. And then of course, we cannot forget about the patients, about the employees and their family members themselves. They need to have a change in their benefit design in order for it to be advantageous for them to go to this particular physician practice or to this ambulatory surgery center. And frankly, it's usually just keep it simple, stupid. It's like, there's no I-apy-the-cost. If you go here and it's in network, you're going to have your deductible, your co-insurance, what have you. And here you're going to have zero out-of-pocket costs.

Or in the case of a physician practice, it might be just a lower co-pay because they've negotiated a certain fee-for-service rate. Okay. And then lastly, in order for those employees to actually make heads or tails of this, they need a navigation service. Now, of course, I am biased here because Compass, where I used to work, is a navigation service. And frankly, I think we do a great job. But unless you're able to actually navigate the employees, then they oftentimes end up getting lost. And that's my summary for direct contracting.

Certainly there's more about this. I'd love to hear your opinion as well. And thank you for watching A Healthcare to See..

