Title: Health Insurance Plan Designs Are TOO Complicated_Yp6TI7iu-m0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yp6TI7iu-m0
Language: en
Duration: 12:58
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is health insurance plan design. Question mark, question mark, meaning confusing, misunderstood. Like, what in the world is going on with health insurance plan designs? So that's what we're going to talk about today. Now, believe it or not, I have actually presented in person at over 200 open enrollment meetings to employees. I kind of jokingly say, but it's probably true, that I'm the only physician in America who has literally presented employee benefits and health insurance plan design at over 200 employee meetings in person.

So, like, I have, like, these statistics that I'm going to talk about here, like, I have literally seen this in person. And so, what happens when you explain health insurance plan design to people? Like, they do not know what's going on. And it's not their fault. It is not the fault of the people who are explaining the health insurance plan design. The point is, is the designs themselves are too confusing. I will give you a specific story around that. Have you, have any of you ever tried to explain American health insurance to an international employee who was born and raised and became an adult in a foreign country and experienced health care in that foreign country and then came to America and then had American health insurance? Like, it is an amazing experience.

It's like, I've done this many times where I would present to people from all over the world who were incredibly intelligent people. I mean, these people had PhDs. These people were engineers. These people were software programmers. And I would explain to them how their insurance benefit design would work with their deductibles and their co-pays and their co-insurance and their out-of-pocket max and the difference between an individual deductible and a family deductible and an embedded deductible. And their reactions were priceless.

They would say things like, this is the dumbest thing I've ever heard. They would say things like, this is insane. They would say things like, this seems like a scam. So, the health insurance plan designs themselves are too complicated. And I'm going to go through some specific statistics around that. Okay, one, only 4% of surveyed Americans could correctly define four basic insurance terms. Deductible, co-insurance, co-pay, and out-of-pocket max. 4%! One in 20, only one in 25 people. I would present to a room, let's say, of 100 people.

Only four of those people actually understood just four basic concepts. And then they broke it down by, okay, well, they would ask them, okay, do you think you understand what a deductible is? And 74% said, yeah, I think I know what a deductible is. But then when they asked them to define a deductible, only 50% actually knew what a deductible was. In other words, they overestimated their understanding. Now, co-insurance gets really interesting. Only 47%, so less than half of people thought they understood what co-insurance was.

And then get this, only 22% actually knew what co-insurance was. Okay, for co-pays, this was the best one. So 83% of people thought they understood what a co-pay was. And 52%, about half the people, so just know, like, co-pays did the best. Of everything, like, people understand co-pays more than they understand anything else. More than deductibles, more than co-insurance. And only just over half of people understand what a co-pay actually is. Okay, out-of-pocket max, 67%, so about two-thirds thought they understood what an out-of-pocket max was.

But only 42% actually did. So, the reason I drew this, like, explosion around the 22% for co-insurance is, look, the health insurance industry, the employee benefits consultants, the insurance brokerage, HR people, VPs of total rewards, directors of benefits, blah, blah, blah. We have been presenting and explaining co-insurance for, like, three or four decades now. We've been doing this for a good 30, 40 years now. And it's a 22%. I would argue it's time to retire co-insurance. That's right. I'm making a stand right here today on A Healthcare C.

I think co-insurance should go away. It's too confusing. Like, again, I don't think it's the fault of the people explaining it. I don't think it's the fault of the employees. Like, literally, it's just too complicated. And it needs to be blown up and thrown away. Now, this is not just one source. United Healthcare itself, from an insurance company, they found that only 9% of plan participants could accurately define what a premium was, what a deductible was, what co-insurance was, and what an out-of-pocket max was.

9%. So, it's still single digits. There's lots of other sources. Look them up yourself. I will leave a link in the show notes to these references as well. So, of course, one of the reasons that people who work in employee benefits say that we have these plan designs is because they want to financially motivate people to have certain behaviors, right? That, like, for example, a primary care physician co-pay is less expensive than a specialist co-pay. So that people know that if they're going to a specialist, that it's going to cost them more.

And so, maybe they would choose the less expensive primary care physician at the lower co-pay as opposed to the specialist at the higher co-pay, right? So, it's using the plan design to create a financial motivation for behavior change. Well, it's not scratching my head. I'm like, well, has anybody studied that? Of course people have studied that. In fact, there is an entire center at the University of Michigan called the Center for Value-Based Insurance Design where they are taking insurance plan design and they're studying it to see how it can have plan members use more higher value-based care.

And let's not even use the word value. Let's just say higher quality care. Value means lower cost too. But let's just say, what if you used your plan design to steer people just to higher quality care? This is what they found. Look, they have, they're actually, and they're doing them today still. They did Medicare Advantage pilots. So, Medicare Advantage plan, right? Person's on Medicare, but they have a commercial insurance plan. So, it's administered by one of the major health insurance carriers or a local insurance carrier for their Medicare Advantage plan.

They've been doing pilots. They started in 2017 and 2018. They've got initial pilot results from the 2017, 2018 year now. And they're going on. They're still doing them now. But they published this. Again, I'll leave a link to the website that shows these results. Only 12% of the plan participants were even aware of their value-based plan design. In other words, only 12% knew that they had either low or no out-of-pocket costs for certain healthcare services, value-based healthcare services. And so, as a result, if only 12% know, then it's really hard to change their behavior if they don't even know what the incentive is to change their behavior in the first place.

And as a result, they only... But shockingly, it actually was statistically significant. And they would do things like, okay, we want to have people have more primary care visits. They were able to have people have more primary care visits. Primary care visits only went up by 3%. So, like, it barely moved the needle. Well, of course it barely moved the needle. Only 12% even knew that the plan design existed. So, what's my point? My point is that there is a tremendous opportunity for plan design simplification. This is not, in my opinion, this is not an education issue.

Like, it's like there's only a certain percentage of the population that's going to be able to understand quantum physics. And there's only a certain percentage of the population that's going to be able to understand insurance plan design. And you know what that percentage is? About 4% to 9%. So, like, I don't think that's going to change a whole lot. So, just know that when you have your plan design at your company, that only about 4% to 9% of the people, like, actually have, like, a minimal, like, four-term understanding of, like, how it works.

So, arguably, like, the innovation in health plan design needs to be an innovation of simplification. The plan designs need to be simpler. Now, I'm saying this because two colleagues of mine, in fact, one of the co-founders of Compass along with me, Scott Shane Vogel, and then his colleague, Wally Goma, have founded a company called Simple Pay Health. Now, I have no financial connection to Simple Pay at all, but I know these guys, and they're super smart, and I wanted to share with you what they're doing at Simple Pay Health.

They are, and they're doing this today with employer groups, where it is a co-pay-only PPO plan. In other words, they did away with the co-insurance. Like, the geniuses, like, they knew. We knew at Compass. We knew from our years of experience at Compass. I mean, we would have people, you know, our health pros would hold people's hands through their plan design, and our health pros would explain co-insurance, like, 50 times to a person, and they still didn't get it. Not because they were dumb, but because the concept is just too complicated.

So, guess what they did at Simple Pay? They got rid of co-insurance. It's co-pays only. They focused on the area of a health insurance plan that people actually understand. Now, they then tied the co-pays to higher quality providers. In other words, you've got a lower co-pay if you go to a higher quality provider, and you've got a higher co-pay if you go to a lower quality provider. So, they took the most basic thing that people understood, and they tied it to the most basic thing that's important for people, which is the quality of their provider.

Now, the other thing that it gives you is that if it's co-pays only, you know what the price is in advance. The price is the co-pay. The price is the co-pay. For the consumer. The price is the co-pay. For the consumer. Guess what that's called? That's called knowable. So, you don't need to have price transparency because you know the co-pay in advance. All right. So, what does that do? You just get rid of your traditional EOBs. You just get a monthly statement that is not an EOB. Believe it or not, I've been to a presentation by the CEO of one of the major health insurance companies in America at this big conference, and he said, these are literally the words that came out of his mouth.

He said that the EOB is the most worthless piece of paper ever created from the CEO of the company. Now, of course, it's tied to navigation as well because at the end of the day, you still only have 52% of the people who even know how you know what a co-pay actually is. So, again, arguably the health insurance is so complicated, even the co-pays are so complicated that you can't, it is an unreasonable expectation to think that we are going to teach people to know this and that they will actually learn it.

They will not. We've tried it for decades and it has not worked. So, they essentially need to have navigation. Now, of course, I'm biased because I founded a healthcare navigation company and I was like, look, at the end of the day, given the way the insurance plan designs are, we can't teach them how to fish. We just got to go fishing for them so that we can take that burden off their hands so that they can, you know, at the end of the day, if you have super complicated taxes, like, you probably should get an account.

You probably should not try to do your taxes on your own. Well, listen, healthcare is like 10 times more complicated than doing your taxes. Okay, so, my point for today is that health insurance plan designs themselves are too complicated and the major innovation that can happen with plan design is simplification. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

