Title: Healthcare Costs in America_  Hospitals_ Doctors_ Medications and More_o_QdZhFOKr4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QdZhFOKr4
Language: en
Duration: 34:39
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello and welcome to our sessions on healthcare costs. Now this first session, this first part of this session is going to be about an overview of healthcare costs. So of course the most important thing about healthcare costs is that they are super high and they're rising. So we're going to get into a whole bunch of numbers and statistics around that, but it's important for all of us to have a general understanding of how high healthcare costs really are and what causes that. So healthcare costs go up by about 7% per year.

Now overall inflation is typically 2% or even less than 2% per year. So 7% doesn't sound like a big number, but it's essentially more than three times the overall inflation rate. Now there's also this thing called the rule of 70, which is whatever the inflation rate is or whatever the percentage increase is, you just take 70 and you divide it by that and that's how many years it's going to take for it to double. So if you take 70 and you divide it by 7, that's 10, so that means that healthcare costs are essentially doubling every 10 years.

Well shoot, that's pretty unsustainable, right? So we know that now that the average healthcare costs for employers in America is about $10,000 per employee on the plan per year. So in just 10 years it's going to be $20,000. Well, it's important to understand who's on the plan. So there are two members, or sometimes it's referred to as bellybuttons or heartbeats, there are two members for every one subscriber on the plan. And the subscriber is the actual employee who's on the plan. Now I went through this before, but I'll go through it again quickly because it's important to understand.

Because everybody messes this up, okay? So let's say it's a company with 120 employees. Not all 120 employees have to take the insurance. They might take their spouse's insurance, they can just refuse to take the insurance. So let's say 100 employees end up taking the insurance. That means there's 100 subscribers. But then there's two members for every one subscriber. So again, they could have a spouse, some people will be single, so it's just one, but they might have a spouse and have like three kids or it might just be employee plus a kid or employee plus two kids.

By the time you average your all out, on average it's about 200 members for every 100 subscribers. Okay, so that's your employee population. 200 members. Now, as far as healthcare costs go, it breaks down into what's called the 80-20 rule, where 80% of the overall healthcare costs for the plan are generated by 20% of the employees, or plan members, I should say. So those folks that are taking a lot of expensive medications, or end up being hospitalized a lot, or end up having a lot of tests or procedures.

So there's a significant number, it's a good 30% of people that will like never use their health insurance at all. Because there's like nothing going on over the course of a year. Because there's like nothing going on with them. Like their body's working fine, they don't go in for anything. So that's called stratification. It's concentrated, where 20% of the people are driving for 80% of the cost. And it stratifies even more, where 50% of the costs are driven by the top 5% of people. Right? So if 5% of people are driving 50% of the cost, that means that the next 15% are driving 30% of the cost to get to the 80.

So that 5% that's driving 50% of the cost. So over half of a company's healthcare costs are driven by just 5% of people. So in the case of this 200 member plan, that means that just 10 people are driving half the healthcare costs for the plan. And again, we said it's $10,000 per year. So that's $2 million. So that means that 10 people are driving a million dollars worth of healthcare spending every year. Or the equivalent of $100,000 per person. Now I'm not here to say that's right or that's wrong. But the point is, is that if an employer is going to be lowering healthcare costs at all, it is super hard to lower healthcare costs unless you do something about the 20% of people that are generating 80% of the cost or the 5% of people that are generating 50% of the cost.

So, there are ways to deliver better care for them, higher quality care for them so they don't have to have as much repeated care. Ways to keep them healthier, ways to treat their diseases earlier so that it doesn't become as catastrophic as it could be. And we're going to talk about some of those practices in additional videos. So, now, in terms of like what diagnoses drive these high healthcare costs. So, what are these people that cost like $100,000 a year? Like, it's not spread out over across all diagnoses.

There's actually three diagnostic categories that drive the majority of healthcare costs for those high cost claimants. And those are musculoskeletal, which is orthopedic and spine. It's basically having aches and pains and mobility problems in your joints, whether it be like your hips and your knees or your spine. Like, those are the major weight-bearing joints, your spine, your hips, and your knees. And those oftentimes become painful and it's the treatment of that pain and that mobility in those joints that is hugely expensive.

Next is cardiovascular. Unfortunately, this typically takes the form of an emergency for something like a heart attack or a stroke or someone might have peripheral vascular disease where they have decreased circulation in their legs. And then the third category is cancer, which is obviously devastating. It's not necessarily an emergency like the heart attack, right? I mean, the heart attack happens, you've got crushing chest pain, you go into the hospital, you immediately get admitted to a cardiac catheterization, maybe coronary artery biped graft.

I mean, it all happens super fast. With cancer, it's obviously incredibly serious, but it tends to be drawn out over weeks or months or maybe even years as the person might get surgery to remove the tumor. The person might get chemotherapy through an IV to treat the cancer. The person might get radiation therapy where special x-rays zap the tumor. They might get a combination of all three. And that all ends up being very expensive. Okay, so that's how it breaks down in terms of diagnoses. And then the fourth one, especially if companies have a lot of younger employees, is labor and delivery.

And there the issue is that it's a pregnancy that has complications either for the mom or for the baby. Or it's a baby that's born prematurely and ends up being in the NICU for a prolonged period of time. So sometimes with companies that have younger employees, they tend to not have, cardiovascular tends to be an issue for folks that are over 50. So for companies that have a lot of younger employees, cardiovascular might be swapped out with maternity and labor and delivery instead. Now, how does it then break down in terms of location or source of cost? So this is diagnoses, but this is the source of the cost.

So 50% of all these healthcare costs are actually driven by the hospital. The hospitals drive the vast majority of healthcare costs compared to other categories. Now, professional fees, which is doctors, therapists, so all the people doing the stuff, that's 25%. Prescription costs are actually 20%. So believe it or not, all the professional fees actually are more than the prescriptions. And people complain a lot about, oh, prescription prices are so, costs are so high. And yes, it is a problem. And yes, it is significant.

But like 75% of the cost is in the hospitals and the professional fees. And then the final 5% is other. Now, let's talk about specifically how these hospitals get paid. A hospital's revenue coming in is broken down. About 40% of their revenue comes from commercial insurance. And about 40% of their revenue comes in from Medicare. And about 10% of their revenue comes in from Medicaid. And about 10% of their income comes from people without insurance or referred to as self-pay. Now, it varies depending upon the part of the country.

So there's some parts of the country that might have 15% Medicaid and only 5% self-pay. And then there's other parts of the country that might have like 45% commercial insurance and only 5% self-pay if they just happen to have, you know, highly employed population, not as much unemployment in the United States. Okay. Now, let's break down. Not all of these payers pay equally. And I'm going to break down the implications for that for the hospital. This is a little complicated, so bear with me. Okay. Now, let's break down a specific example here for a hospital that brings in, let's say, $100 million a year in revenue, just to use a round number.

Okay. So, that means that there would be 10,000 patients. Let's just say the hospital saw 10,000 patients in a year. Again, it's using nice round numbers. Okay. Let's say they had 10,000 patients come into their hospital in a year, and each one of those patients, on average, brought in $10,000. So $10,000 times 10,000 patients gets you $100 million. Now, let's say that hospitals, but that hospital doesn't have an equal distribution of patients across commercial, Medicare, Medicaid. So let's say if you added up all the patients that had Medicare plus Medicaid plus that were self-pay, let's say 7,000 out of those 10,000 patients were on Medicare, Medicaid or self-pay.

And let's say on average, Medicare, Medicaid and self-pay only paid $5,000 per patient. So the 7,000 patients times the 5,000 per patient gets you $35 million. Okay. But the hospital's bringing in $100 million a year. So the hospital's like, well, shoot, it costs us $100 million to, let's just say the hospital's breaking even. They're not making any profit. They're just breaking even. Right. So let's say that, okay, then they've got a remaining 3,000 patients, right, because there's 7,000 that are Medicare, Medicaid, self-pay, so that means there's 3,000 that are on commercial insurance.

And they've got $65 million that they need to collect from those 3,000 patients in order to reach their $100 million budget. So if you do the math on that, that means that it's $22,000 per commercially insured patient. So you can see that while the breakdown is 40% commercial, 40% Medicare, 10% Medicaid, 10% self-pay, right. And this example is a little different because I was using round numbers here for $5,000 per patient. But in general, you're seeing that the commercial insurance is actually over three times more expensive.

It's higher than what it is for the non-commercial insurance patients. $22,000 per commercial insurance patients, $7,000 per Medicare, Medicaid patient. So what the hospitals do is they cross-subsidize the low payment per patient for Medicare, Medicaid, and self-pay. And then they overcharge and overbill and get paid much more, have much higher negotiated rates for their commercial insurance. And that process of cross-subsidization is why health insurance is so expensive for employers in America. Because employers in America and employees in America are cross-subsidizing the low payments by Medicare, Medicaid, and for people that don't have insurance.

So, when healthcare costs go up by 7% per year, what I mean is healthcare costs for commercially insured people go up by 7% per year. Because the hospitals are constantly robbing Peter to pay Paul from the commercial insurance folks to pay for the other folks. Again, I'm not saying that's right or that's wrong. I'm just saying that's how it works. And that's important for everyone to understand. Thank you for watching. Hello, welcome back. So, in talking about healthcare costs, we are now going to talk specifically about increasing hospital revenue.

Now, one of the most important concepts in economics that anyone can understand is that one person's spending is another person's income or revenue. So when we talk about increased healthcare costs, whether it be for individuals or for companies or for the government, that increased cost is another organization's revenue. And in this case, it's the hospital's revenue. So, in order for hospitals to increase revenue, which is what they want to do, they need to increase healthcare costs. So we talked about how in the previous part about how hospitals are actually the largest segment of healthcare spending.

It's more than doctors, it's more than pharmaceutical spending. So hospitals are a huge driver of overall healthcare costs increase in America. Now, we also talked in the previous video, I was brief review, that hospitals use commercial insurance revenue from Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna to cross-subsidize their lower payments from Medicare and Medicaid for people that don't have insurance. Now, the commercial insurance revenue is not really coming from the insurance company, it's really coming from employers, right, because employers are paying the premium to the insurance company.

And all the insurance company is doing is facilitating the transaction, right. So it's really employers in America that are cross-subsidizing the lower payments by Medicare and Medicaid. Now, hospitals have a couple of strategies that they use for increasing that revenue. And it is horizontal integration and vertical integration. Now, horizontal integration is when hospital systems merge with each other. So, it's through mergers. So, the majority of cities in America actually do not have a lot of choices, right.

It's the whole idea where, okay, well if you've got a whole bunch of any businesses competing, well they're going to compete on price and they're going to lower the price. But if you can decrease the competition, then those businesses can increase the price. So, hospitals have merged to decrease competition so that they can increase their prices. That way when the hospital system goes to Blue Cross, United, Signor, Aetna, they'll be like, look, for XYZ City, you have to have us in your network. What are you going to do? Not have us in your network? There's not many other options in town.

Your members are going to be like, what? You don't mean our hospital system is in the network? We're not going to buy that insurance from you. So, that's why hospitals use mergers to, with other hospital systems, to increase their revenue. Now, as I just mentioned, the majority of cities in America actually don't have a lot of competition. So, probably the A number one example of that is in Phoenix, where the Banner hospital system in Phoenix, it's like the only game in town. Like, you don't really have any options in Phoenix other than Banner.

And guess what? Health care costs in Phoenix are very high. Likewise, in the entire state of Wisconsin, they really only have like, two hospital systems. Kind of three. Right? For an entire state. Right? So, in Milwaukee, they've got Aurora, which is now Advocate Aurora, because it merged with a big hospital system in Chicago. And then they have, so Ascension is like the second or third largest hospital system in America. And it's a big Catholic hospital system. And they have hospitals all over the country. But they bought the Ministry Health System in Wisconsin.

So, now all those Ministry hospitals are now Ascension hospitals. So, you've got Aurora and Ascension are like the two, the vast majority of Wisconsin only has access to those two hospitals. They've got a little bit of Mayo Clinic over by the Wisconsin border. But that's it. So, guess what? Health care costs in Wisconsin are very high. They're higher than the national average. Now, the other way that hospitals increase their revenue and increase health care costs is through vertical integration by buying doctor practices.

Right? So, vertical integration is saying, okay, well we get our patients from somewhere. And can we buy something that will ensure that we get more patient volume? And the answer is yes. They buy physician practices. Because people don't like make appointments with a hospital. They make appointments with a doctor. Especially a primary care doctor. So, the number of physicians that are now employed by a hospital system is now the majority of physicians in America. Most physicians in America are no longer independent.

10, 15 years ago, the majority of physicians in America used to be independent. Now they're not. They're owned by and employed by a hospital system. That's especially true for primary care physicians. And the hospital systems do that because they use those primary care doctors as a referral funnel. They say, okay, well you go in to see doctor XYZ. And then if they need to order a lab or an x-ray or an MRI for you, they're going to order that at the specific hospital system that owns them. Likewise, if they need to refer to your nose and throat doctor or to a cardiologist, they're going to refer to a doctor that is also either employed by the hospital or does all their tests and procedures also at the hospital.

So, they use that as a funnel or a net to capture more patient volume. And that's why they've gone through this vertical integration strategy. In fact, there was an example of a physician practice in North Carolina where the hospital system said, hey, you guys need to refer, because we own you now, you need to refer all your patients to us. And the group of primary care doctors was like, well, what if we don't want to? What if there's another doctor across town that we think is better? I want to refer my patients to them.

And the hospital system, oh, no, you can't do that. So, you know what the doctors did? They left. They quit. And they formed their own independent practice so that they could refer to whoever they wanted to because they didn't want the hospital system telling them what to do. That was the Atrium Health System in Charlotte, North Carolina. Okay. Now, the underlying financial mechanism for hospitals making money is what is referred to as fee for service. So, a hospital does a service like an endoscopy or a surgery or a cardiac stress test and they send a bill to the insurance company.

And the insurance company pays them back and that's referred to as fee for service. So, what does that incentivize? That incentivizes services. The hospital wants to do as many services as it can so that it can collect as much fees as it can. It's in the name. What happens if people are healthy? The services go down. So, ultimately, no hospital will come out and say this, but ultimately, hospitals need people to be sick. Because if they're not sick, then they can't come in and do services for them. Okay. Now, what does that also mean? That also means that you might have heard of this term value-based payment or value-based care.

Because the, you know, Medicare and Medicaid and a lot of the health insurance companies and even employers are like, well, we don't like this arrangement because it incentivizes you to do more than you should. Now, what if we just paid you a fixed amount? Let's say per person. Or maybe we paid you, now keep in mind, in fee for service today, there's no like quality aspect to that. So, it could be like, in fact, they even did a study that for commercial insurance, that when a hospital had a complication of a surgery, they got paid more.

So, financially, the hospital was not at risk at all for the complication of a surgery. Now, of course, they're not going out of their way to make complications, but at the end of the day, complications are financially good for a hospital. So, they've tried to counteract that perverse incentive through these value-based payments, which is another way of saying capitation. Saying, hey, we're going to give you a fixed fee per person. Well, that would actually incentivize the hospital to provide less for them because they're getting a certain amount and they don't want to provide as many services for them.

So, in other words, that puts the hospital at risk for providing more services for a fixed amount of money. Guess what? Hospitals don't want that. Hospitals do not want value-based payment. Again, they're not going to come out and say that, but they don't want that. So, this is the mentality of a hospital administrator. Now, the front line people, the doctors and the nurses, are not necessarily consciously thinking this way every day, but in terms of how the administrators and the executives of the hospital are organizing their hospital, like, those are the financial incentives that are in place.

And so, it's super important for us in healthcare to understand that. Thank you for watching. Hello and welcome back. Now, we're going to discuss increasing doctor revenue as a driver of increasing healthcare costs. So, I mentioned before that physician or professional fee income represents about 25% of overall healthcare costs. So, it's substantial. And the major driver of the increase in doctor costs in the healthcare system are private equity firms. So, here's what's been going on. So, private equity firms are where, many of you are probably familiar with this, but it's basically a firm that goes out and they get a bunch of investors, they give them a ton of money, and then they borrow a whole bunch more money in terms of debt, and then they go out and buy businesses.

And they either turn those businesses around or they combine those businesses to give them more pricing power and increase their revenue, and then they either sell them off to another private equity firm or they take them public on the stock exchange. So, private equity firms have been buying a ton of physician practices. Now, they haven't been buying all physician practices. Historically, they have targeted very specific types of physician practices. They have targeted ER physicians, radiology physicians, anesthesiologists, and pathologists.

Well, why these particular doctors? It's because when you see an ER doctor or radiologist who's reading your x-ray, or an anesthesiologist who's putting you to sleep in the operating room, or a pathologist who's looking at your biopsy underneath a microscope and saying whether it is or is not cancer, like, you have a, as a patient, you have no choice. You don't ever say, I wonder who the ER doctor is in that ER. You don't say, oh, I wonder who the, I'm going to choose which radiologist is going to read my x-ray.

You don't get a choice. You don't get a choice in what anesthesiologist is going to put you to sleep in the OR. And you don't get a choice in what pathologist is going to be looking at your tissue biopsy. So, what the private equity firms did is they took advantage of the fact that people had no choice in these physicians, and they made them a lot of network. They went to all the insurance carriers and be like, we have no desire to negotiate a discount with you, and we're going to stay out of network. So, what that means then is that your typical, like, in-network reimbursement for, like, one of these doctors might be like $139.

But, when they're taken out of network, then they're literally charging like $1,500. Like, literally, our family got a bill from a radiologist to read an MRI, my wife's MRI. And literally, it takes like six minutes to read this MRI. And just for the physician, not to perform the MRI, but just for this physician to read the MRI and do six minutes of work, they charged us $1,500 as an out-of-network provider. Now, if they were in-network, they only would have gotten paid $139. So, the private equity firm, without making the physician see any more patients or work any harder, they increased the revenue of these practices tenfold.

And again, one person's spending is another person's income. So, when you increase the revenue of a physician practice, you increase overall healthcare costs. So, and this is bad for patients because, again, when we talked about plan design, those out-of-network bills, like, you can still submit a bill to the insurance company, and the insurance company says, oh, this is out-of-network, so it's going to go to your out-of-network deductible. And a lot of people's out-of-network deductible, again, it's totally separate from your in-network deductible.

So, let's say you've met your in-network deductible. Doesn't matter. This is an out-of-network bill. You, the patient, are going to have to pay it because it's a completely separate deductible. And that out-of-network deductible is pretty high. That's $2,000, $3,000, $4,000 per person per year. So, in this case, the $1,500 completely applied to our out-of-network deductible. So, we were on the hook for all of that. Or, if you're, and that's only if you have a PPO plan, if you've got a point of, or a CDHP, if you've got a point of service plan, out-of-network services aren't covered at all.

So, it doesn't matter if it's deductible or not. Like, you're on the hook for it no matter what. You essentially don't have insurance for out-of-network services. So, what happened was, obviously, people were getting these astronomic bills. And it wasn't just bills for $1,500. Some people were getting bills for like $100,000. There was a couple that had a premature baby at a hospital in New Mexico, where, unfortunately, the premature baby was in the NICU for months and months and months. And the neonatal ICU doctors, again, neonatal ICU doctors, same thing, private equity firms buy these folks too.

They were all out-of-network. So, for months and months and months, they were getting $1,500 a day charges from the NICU doctors. Ended up being tens of thousands of dollars for them. Now, so what happened was, obviously, people were complaining crazy, crazy, crazy, crazy. And they talked to their congressman, etc., etc., and finally, they passed the surprise billing law. Which says that as of January 1st of 2022, that if there's an out-of-network charge, that the health insurance company and the out-of-network doctor have to go to arbitration to decide an amount.

Now, who was the largest opponent to this legislation? It was a consortium of private equity firms. Because that is their strategy for increasing revenue and increasing healthcare costs. So, when we talk about increasing healthcare costs, it's important to understand the role of private equity firms. Thank you for watching. Hello and welcome back. Now, we're going to talk about a third area of increasing healthcare costs. And that is increasing pharmaceutical company revenue. In other words, higher prescription costs and prescription prices, right? We said that prescriptions were about 20% of overall U.S.

healthcare spending. So, let's talk about why prescriptions are increasing healthcare costs. So, the U.S. population does not take more medications than other people in other industrialized nations, either in Asia or Europe, etc. So, the issue is not the number of pills or medications that America can take. It's just that the price per pill or the price per medication is much higher in America than in other countries. Now, why is that? In America, we have very strong patent protection rules where when a pharmaceutical company creates a new medication, they can patent it, which gives them exclusivity for creating that particular medication for 17 years.

And the whole point of that is to encourage pharmaceutical companies to do more research, to invent more medications so that their technology or the way that they, you know, biochemically created the pill is not then immediately taken by somebody else and duplicated. So, what that means is that during that period of patent protection, there are no generics. And that's fine, okay, but it's a balance. And arguably, the patent protection in America has gotten a little out of hand. And the pharmaceutical companies use patent protection to make as much money as they can off of a brand name medication.

And typically, those brand name medications, they might be like $350 a month. And then once they go generic, they literally drop as low as like $5 a month. So, we're not talking like a 10 or a 20 percent decrease. I mean, we're talking multiple orders of magnitude less expensive when you make generic. So, what do the pharmaceutical companies do? They extend the patents. So, when a pharmaceutical company puts a patent on a medication, they don't just put one patent on it. They don't put two patents on it. They don't put 10 patents on it.

They literally put dozens of patents on just one medication to create what's referred to as a patent thicket. So, the highest grossing medication in America and even in the world is Humira. And Humira literally has dozens and dozens of patents on one medication. So, what happens is that you keep extending out beyond the 17 years. So, you can extend, say, okay, well, one patent expires. Yeah, but we got another patent. That hasn't expired yet. Okay, that one expired. Okay, but we got another patent. That one hasn't expired yet.

So, they create this patent thicket. Now, sure, a company could make a generic, but then the original manufacturer and creator of the medication would then go after them and sue them and increase the cost of creating that generic because they could say, look, you violated one of our 27 patents. Okay, next, let's say there's some, at the end of the day, all the patents expire. Shoot. The, the, it's up. Generics can now be made. The makers, the original makers of the brand pharmaceutical will actually pay other pharmaceutical companies that want to make the generic.

The maker of the brand new medication will pay the potential maker of the generic medication to not make the medication. They essentially bribe them to not make the medication. It's referred to as pay to delay. Oh, and one of the biggest ones is Takeda Pharmaceuticals. So, Takeda Pharmaceuticals makes a ton of generic medications. So, like literally a brand, a, the maker of a brand new medication will pay Takeda to like, well, don't make this particular one. We're going to pay you to do that. So, essentially the generic manufacturer, like, gets paid for doing nothing.

So, very sneaky strategies for increasing healthcare costs and prescription costs in America. Okay. Now, the, of course you've got to get the physicians to actually prescribe this stuff. So the pharmaceutical companies actually have ways of incenting doctors to prescribe this as well. Now, you can't do direct kickbacks anymore. Believe it or not, 20, 30 years ago, and that's actually more like 30 years ago, pharmaceutical companies used to literally pay doctors to prescribe medications. They would give them trips to Hawaii.

Oh, if you prescribe a certain number of medications, we'll give you a set of golf clubs. If you prescribe a certain number of medications, we'll give you a free trip to Hawaii. That obviously is not in the best interest of the patient, where the physician would be financially incentivized to prescribe medications for the patient that the patient didn't necessarily need. So the government came back and said, you know, you can't do those kickbacks. That's illegal. And so the pharmaceutical company found ways around that where they said, look, instead of just paying you outright for prescribing these medications, we'll just give you money for being a speaker and promoting our medication.

There's nothing wrong with that. And they'll have like some, you know, back room in a restaurant where they'll invite other physicians in and that physician will come. Oh, listen, I've been to these before. The doctor gets up and talks for like five minutes about the medication and then the rest is just a fancy dinner and socializing. Likewise, the pharmaceutical companies will pay a consulting fee to the physicians for their insight about the use of the product in the marketplace. And that's just sort of a thinly veiled, it's not a kickback, but it is certainly pretty close to a kickback for just prescribing a lot of medications.

So in other words, there are still ways to incentivize. And one of the biggest ways too is just food. So the pharmaceutical companies bring tons and tons of food to the physician's office. And in fact, physician practices will have a schedule of, okay, you know, pharmacy rep A's coming on Monday with Italian, they're coming on Tuesday with Chinese, they're coming on Wednesday with vegetarian. And so one of the benefits that a physician practice then says to their employees, to the clerks and staff and the nurses, is to say, look, if you come work at our practice, you get free lunch every day catered by the pharmaceutical company.

So a lot of times it's even just done in terms of food for the practices. So there's a variety of strategies that pharmaceutical companies use to increase the demand and to increase the prices for their prescriptions, which overall contributes to increasing healthcare costs. Thank you for watching. Hello and welcome back. Now we're going to have another session about increasing healthcare costs. And it's due to increased medical device revenue driving increased healthcare costs. Now most patients and health insurance companies, they don't directly buy medical devices.

But by medical devices, it's things like the actual artificial knee and hip implants themselves, or the pacemaker that goes into a person's heart. Now these, let's just take a knee or a hemp replacement. Now the companies that make these are on the Fortune 500. So some of the largest companies in America are actually these medical device makers. A lot of people have never heard of these companies before. Say, so they actually make a knee or a hip implant. It only costs them about $300 to make it. Now the manufacturer of the knee or the hip implant then sells it to the hospital for $3,000.

Okay, so that's a 10x markup. Now the reason why the hospital is willing to pay so much for something that only costs $300 is then the hospital is then able to turn around and bill the commercial health insurance plan a line item. So a carve out in there when they negotiate their contracts. They negotiate a specific line item for reimbursement of the implant itself. And they'll have the line item for like $30,000 where the hospital negotiates with Blue Cross United City and Aetna. And they're going to pay me $30,000 for that implant itself.

So that's another 10x markup from what the hospital paid for it. So a 10x markup here and a 10x markup here. So essentially it is marked up a hundred times what it costs to actually make the implant. So this is a perfect example of how the actual implant, the technology itself is not that expensive. What makes it expensive is when you have revenue generation driving price increases. Because at the end of the day, your patient is not going to shop around for the actual implant. They don't have any say. It's the doctor that decides.

It's the hospital that decides. So this markup here is a fantastic way to make money. And it's a fantastic way to increase costs at the same time. Because again, one person's spending is another person's income. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching..

