Title: Healthcare Quality is Diligence_ Thoroughness and Attention to Detail... Learn  How to Find It._VHJQAUYwigo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VHJQAUYwigo
Language: en
Duration: 9:42
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is healthcare quality is diligence, it is thoroughness, and it is attention to detail. Now, I've been talking to a lot of doctors and quality experts and employers and broker benefit consultants a lot about healthcare quality recently. And I think that healthcare quality can be boiled down to diligence because healthcare is a service and really to provide a high quality service it requires diligence. Now, this is not an Eric Bricker idea.

This goes all the way back to Dr. William Osler who was the founding physician of the Hopkins Department of Medicine over a hundred years ago in the early 1900s. Now, this is a picture of him right here. Now, Dr. William Osler wrote a book, or rather a book was written about him called The Quotable Osler. So, it's a whole bunch of William Osler quotes. I did my residency at Hopkins and all the medicine residents are given this book when they finish their residency. And guess what? Dr. William Osler over a hundred years ago had this to say about diligence and healthcare quality.

I'm going to read you a few quotes. By far, the most dangerous foe we have to fight is apathy. Apathy. Indifference from whatever cause, not from a lack of knowledge, but from carelessness, from absorption in other pursuits, from contempt bred of self-satisfaction. Next quote. Next quote. The killing vice of the young doctor is intellectual laziness. And finally, maintain an incessant watchfulness, lest complacency beget indifference, or lest local interest should be permitted to narrow the influence of a trust which exists for the good of the whole country.

That's right. That's right. Over a hundred years ago, Dr. William Osler said that apathy was the worst trait a physician could have. Accordingly, a complete lack of apathy, a complete obliteration of apathy, a complete elimination of apathy is diligence. And there's a huge culture of diligence within Johns Hopkins. So it's even referred to as being Oslerian. Hopkins has an Oslerian culture amongst the nurses, amongst the respiratory therapists, and the physical therapists, and the doctors, where look, everybody was kind of expected to be diligence.

And if anybody was kind of like slacking off, everybody else kind of like looking around and be like, why are you slacking off? You can't slack off. That's not what we do here. We're diligent around here. So there was really a culture of diligence. Now I will say that other places where I've worked in healthcare, it was kind of spotty. Okay. There were like pockets of diligence, but it wasn't really uniform throughout the organization. And that's another video for another day. Okay. Now note, what is not healthcare quality? What did William Osler not say healthcare quality was? It was not measured via outcomes.

Okay. So at the end of the day, of course, you have some patients who are incredibly sick. They have an incredibly advanced disease and you can be as diligent as humanly possible. And at the end of the day, they may have a bad outcome. Now, every doctor knows that if you want to, you know, quote unquote, have good outcomes, the best way to do that is to cherry pick your patients to only have the easiest patients and to lemon drop your worst patients, your most complicated patients, the patients with the most advanced disease, the most, the patients who are the most, who are the least adherent to your advice or to taking medications, right? So really, if you're measuring by outcomes, all you're really measuring is the doctor's ability to cherry pick and lemon drop.

And that's not what you want. You want to measure their diligence. Okay. We also, because we're talking on a healthcare finance channel here, compensation should be, should promote diligence. Okay. So listen, you can have whatever compensation structure you want, but I would argue the end goal of that compensation structure is to promote diligence. Now fee for service, by and large, the major form of compensation for doctors here in America, I would argue promotes rushing and rushing is not diligence because if you, the more patients you can see, the more you can bill and the more money that you can make.

And so if you can see patients, if you spend only five minutes with a patient instead of 15 minutes with a patient, then you are financially rewarded in fee for service. That does not promote diligence. Okay. Now, of course here on a healthcare Z, we have to have a two by two matrix. So if you were going to apply this framework of diligence to a population, then here, what we have on the top of this two by two matrix is high clinical complexity or seriousness, which would be something like major surgery, like a, like a spine surgery or a knee or a hip replacement, cancer, cardiovascular disease.

I'd even put complex OB in here as well, whether it's complicated for the mom or complicated for the baby. Okay. So you want, and then over here on the side, we have diligence. So you want a high degree of diligence with a high degree of complexity. Okay. Now what's the exact opposite of that? Well, when you have low diligence, but you also then have low complexity, you might just have an upper respiratory tract infection. You got a runny nose or et cetera. So like, okay, maybe you need a COVID test. Maybe you need a, a strep throb.

Maybe you need a flu, a flu test. Okay. So fine. Like not hugely complicated. Okay. So you don't necessarily have to have the most, the greatest diligence in the world for addressing that. And that's totally okay because we have to stratify our resource allocation, our diligence, um, allocation, right? It's totally okay. But what you really don't want to have is you don't want to have a very complicated situation with low diligence. You don't want to have major surgery, cancer, cardiovascular disease, high risk OB in a low diligence environment with low diligence doctors and low diligence nurses.

Okay. You don't want that. Okay. And then likewise, you actually don't want high diligence with low complexity. In other words, you don't want to have a huge degree. They used to have this at the outpatient clinics out in the suburbs of Hopkins, where all of the outpatient doctors would come in and be our attendings in the hospital every once in a while. And then they'd be like, yeah, look, my clinic is mostly just the worried. Well, they're coming in and they don't really have a lot of complex disease. Their diseases, diseases, they don't have that many chronic diseases.

Their diseases, diseases aren't that advanced, but so like, that's not good either because there's an opportunity cost. So here you have all these incredibly diligent people who are not necessarily treating the most complicated situations. So listen, you've got to be able, and I have another video about mismatch between providers and disease. And I'll leave a link in the show note to that provider mismatch video where I go into this in much greater detail. Okay. So, so fine. What is, what is practical information that you or employee health plan members can use? Okay.

So it's very difficult for a patient to like ascertain the diligence of a physician. One of the things that they can do is if they go to a primary care physician first, a primary care physician probably has a lot more knowledge of the local other providers in the area. And it's going to have a better understanding, frankly, of where that diligence is for your particular situation. So if the, if anything, you're almost looking for the referral expertise of that primary care physician as part of that service that they're going to provide for you.

And then also to like a navigation and at our old navigation service, Compass Professional Health Services, that's what we did all the time. Like we spent like literally all day long, we were identifying the highly diligent physicians. And then we were talking to our members and figuring out if they had a high or low complexity medical situations. And then we were matching up. We would get people with a new cancer diagnosis, like almost daily at Compass. And we're like, look, you know, what, what, you know, whatever, wherever you were located in the country, et cetera, it's like, okay, well, what are the various criteria that we're going to use to identify those high, the high diligence, surgical oncologists, medical oncologists, et cetera, for that complex situation.

Now, your own experience as a patient can also be helpful in assessing diligence. And I call them the three don'ts. Listen, if the doctor doesn't listen very well, if they don't explain things to you very well, and if they don't wash their hands in front of you, then they are probably not diligent. To say that in the affirmative, I have seen highly diligent, quote unquote, high quality doctors almost always be very good listeners, explain in detail what's going on to their patients, and by all means, wash their hands in front of the patients.

So it's not perfect, but if you have a doctor who doesn't listen well, doesn't explain things very well, and is not washing their hands in front of you, then like you just need to vote with your feet and you need to find somebody else. So I think the issue of healthcare quality, while it may seem complicated, can actually be boiled down to diligence and thoroughness and attention to detail. And that's what I wanted to share with you today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

