Title: Healthcare is Great on Medicare_OtKvQrpZh8k
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OtKvQrpZh8k
Language: en
Duration: 9:16
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is healthcare is great if you're on Medicare. So on this channel, I'm highly critical of the U.S. healthcare system, but I don't want you to get the wrong impression. For many people in America, healthcare actually works out great and they're highly satisfied with it. And those people are people who have Medicare generally. Now, I'm going to start out with a brief story of my grandfather, who in many ways was sort of the prototypical Medicare beneficiary.

He was born in 1920. He served in the Navy during World War II. He was on a destroyer in the South Pacific, was involved in the Guadalcanal and Philippines campaigns, came back from the more married family. His career was as an accountant and retired at 65, had a coronary artery bypass graft at the age of 72. I think it was a quadruple and highly successful surgery. And then a few years later, he had such bad arthritis in his knees that he actually ended up getting a bilateral, in other words, both knees, told knee replacement.

He had both of his knees replaced at the same time. His orthopedic surgeon gave him a choice. He's like, well, we could do one and then the other, or he could just do both at the same time. And my grandfather just grabbed the bulls by the horn and said, hey, let's do them both at the same time. And it was so bad that he could only walk around his house, sort of from piece of furniture to piece of furniture. He'd kind of walk a few feet, hold onto a chair, walk another few feet, hold onto an end table. So after he had, his cabbage and his total knee replacement, like he went back to playing golf, like he was body surfing in the ocean into his late eighties.

And he was living on his own, driving, fully functional, read the newspaper every day, up until like the last six to 12 months of his life. And he ended up passing away at the age of 92. So look at this, his, and he had no intervention after his cabbage. He had no stents. He didn't need to have a revision of his cabbage. I mean, to have a cabbage functioning for 20 years is awesome. I mean, hats off to his cardiothoracic surgeon and his cardiologist. They did a great job. And then his total, I mean, his total knee replacements were great too.

Like he went from being barely able to walk to body surfing in the ocean, getting knocked around by the waves, totally fine. So like it was huge success, hugely satisfied with his medical care. Like he is a huge recipient of modern medicine. Like he probably would have died in the seventies if he had not gotten that cabbage. And if not, he would have been like wheelchair bound if it wasn't for the knee replacements. So here he had a huge, you know, highly functional life for like an additional 20 years as a result of his healthcare and Medicare paying for it.

I mean, what a success. Yeah. Turns out he's not alone. More than 90% of seniors are satisfied with their care. Like they like it. So, and of course, when you're on Medicare over the age of 65, you got kind of tool options. You got traditional Medicare and then you got Medicare Advantage. Now with traditional Medicare, the advantages is that you have a ton of choice. You can see any specialist you want and almost all specialists take Medicare. You don't need any prior authorization for any tests or procedures. You can just have it done and Medicare will pay for it.

And with Medicare Advantage, and again, there's out-of-pocket costs associated with traditional Medicare, especially for the outpatient services. And a lot of people then have what is called a Medicare supplement plan or a Medigap plan, which is additional insurance to kind of pay for those out-of-pocket costs on top of it. So it ends up being more out-of-pocket costs, but if people are either not willing or interested, which is unable to pay those additional out-of-pocket costs, there's another option.

And that's Medicare Advantage plans where they're very low to no out-of-pocket costs. Like it's super cheap, but you don't have as much choice. So there you do have to have a primary care physician gatekeeper and you do need prior authorizations, but you have a choice, right? If it's choice between, do you want to have more choice and more cost? Or do you want to have less choice and less cost? So it's a choice. And we're up to the point now where like 40% of seniors are on Medicare Advantage and 60% are on traditional Medicare about.

Now, the access is actually good for people on Medicare. So for hospital house patient services, typically they can get that done within three weeks. And again, they're satisfied with that. And then for doctor's appointments, they can get them in about a month. And that holds true for both traditional Medicare and for Medicare Advantage. So regardless of which Medicare choice you're on, like your access to care is pretty timely. And seniors are actually pretty satisfied with it. I shouldn't say pretty satisfied, very satisfied with it.

Now, let's look at the negative. Okay, it's not perfect. It's not all sunshine and rainbows. So for traditional Medicare, 5% of people have difficulty with access to care and appointments. And for Medicare Advantage, it's a little higher at 7%, which you can understand, right? Because you got the PCP gatekeeper, you need prior authorization, right? So, but that's still pretty low, right? Only 7% of Medicare Advantage participants have a problem with it. Only 5% of people with traditional Medicare have a problem with it.

Now, in terms of like, okay, well, the reason why access to care is a problem is because of cost, right? Because Medicare, Medicare Advantage is an insurance program. It pays for the care, right? It's only, it's even, of the 5%, only 1.7%. In other words, a third of the 5% of people in traditional Medicare say that, you know what, I'm having trouble accessing care and getting the care I need because it's too expensive. Only 1.7%. That is incredibly low. Likewise, for Medicare Advantage, it's also about a third of the 7% of people that say, well, I can't get access to care because it just costs too much.

And that's 2.3%. I mean, look at that. I mean, so we talk about healthcare costs being high. Like, if you're on Medicare, Medicare Advantage, like, in terms of you and your out-of-pocket costs, like, for the vast majority of Medicare recipients, like, the cost of healthcare in America, it's like, not a problem. My grandfather, like, never complained about the cost of healthcare for himself. And he was an accountant. Believe me, he knew what he was paying. Now, so I'm not even going to compare this to commercial insurance or Medicaid.

Like, I'm not even going to compare this to the satisfaction rates of commercial insurance and the issues around out-of-pocket costs for people who have employer-sponsored insurance or on ACA plans or Medicaid. Like, I'm not even going to bring that up because this video is meant to be positive. I'm only going to talk about positive stuff. So, now, of course, so this is a huge healthcare party. Healthcare is great for these people. Now, here's the issue. The Medicare trust fund that pays for all of this will become insolvent in 2026.

This is 2022. That's only four years away. Like, that's not that long in the future. So, the healthcare is great. This party will not go on forever. And in fact, we only have about four years left. And by insolvent, I specifically mean Medicare Part A, the part that pays for the hospital care. It becomes insolvent in 2026. Now, let's get to the issue of, who are these happy Medicare people? Well, there are 63 million Americans that are on Medicare, and the majority of them are seniors. Now, if you're, you know, permanently disabled, let's say you're on dialysis, you also get Medicare as well if you're under the age of 65.

But, 63 million Americans have Medicare. So, interestingly, from a voting perspective, this is probably a statistic that many of you are aware of, is that of the voting population, of people who actually cast their votes in the votes recent presidential election, 22% were age 65 and older. And that is the largest block of voters. In other words, all the other cohorts of age groups are far less than the cohort of those 65 plus. And in fact, those age 65 and over only represent 16% of the U.S. population. So, they vote at much higher rates than the rest of the population.

This is not new news. My only reason for bringing this up here at the end is that if there's going to be, you know, and we change healthcare some. I mean, I don't want to say that there's a total lack of federal legislation around healthcare. I mean, there certainly has. But if you want to see change, then obviously it's the people who hold political power. And if they're happy, they're not necessarily going to be pushing for a whole bunch of change. So, here you have the most politically powerful demographic in the U.S.

population who, in general, is very happy with their healthcare. And so, listen, that's all I wanted to share today. Nothing but good news today here on A Healthcare Z. Thank you for watching..

