Title: Healthcare Costs Are Too Low - _4.5 Trillion Per Year is Not Enough_PlxyTdJX3AQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PlxyTdJX3AQ
Language: en
Duration: 8:54
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is counterpoint. Health care costs are too low. Yes, you heard that right. Here on A Health Care Z, I historically have talked about how health care costs are too high and about why they're too high and about ways that we can lower health care costs. But today I'm going to give the counter argument because I think it's important to us to examine both sides of the issue of health care costs. So there are organizations and people in America who think that health care costs are too low and frankly they need to be higher.

Specifically, let's look at the total amount of U.S. health care spending and the largest contributor to that health care spending, which is hospitals. Okay, so America spends $4.5 trillion per year on health care. Like I said, hospitals are the largest component of that $4.5 trillion. They're 30%. So you take the $4.5 trillion times 30%, that means that hospital expenditures per year are $1.35 trillion. Now the largest expenditures for hospitals are labor. It's people. It's wages. It's people working there. Health care is a services business.

And so labor costs make up 60% of the total hospital costs of the $1.35 trillion. So you take $1.35 trillion and multiply it by 60% and that gets you to hospital labor costs of $810 billion. Now what's $810 billion? Well, it's a ton of money. It's almost the equivalent of the entire Department of Defense budget, which was $850 billion. Okay, so we're talking labor costs for hospital systems alone are almost as much as the entire Defense Department budget. And guess what? They're too low and they need to be hired.

So we need to stop shortchanging all these people that work at hospitals. Now, who are the people that work at hospitals? Let's break it down. Okay, doctors work at hospitals. Not all doctors, but a very large percentage of doctors work at hospitals. There's about a million doctors total in America and on average, they make $352,000 a year. Nurses work at hospitals. There's about 4.7 million nurses and they make on average $83,000 a year. Let's talk about physical therapists. They work at hospitals. There's about 576,000 physical therapists in America.

On average, they make about $98,000 a year. And of course, there's medical billers, specifically who work in coding. And there's approximately 135,000 of those, and they on average make $47,000. And you know what? That's too low. They all don't get paid enough. They all should be paid more. Now, let's compare this. So who are the big payers of hospital systems? Okay, it's the government and its employers, its corporations. Okay, so fine. Let's look at what the government spends lots of money on and pays people lots of money for.

Okay, well, the federal government has its nuclear weapons research and maintenance facility out in New Mexico. It's called Los Alamos. And guess what? The budget for Los Alamos is $1.8 billion. So you're just like, oh, that's not that a lot of money. But there's only 16,000 people that work at Los Alamos. And so that means that the average wage, the average wage at Los Alamos is $113,000. You mean to tell me that nurses and physical therapists and medical billers are not as important? You mean to tell me that the government is prioritizing Los Alamos over life and death and pain and suffering for US citizens? I'm not saying to pay Los Alamos less, but if the government's willing to pay people at Los Alamos, Los Alamos County in New Mexico is one of the wealthiest counties in America.

Okay, because the federal government pays them a ton of money. Okay, again, like, are the people at Los Alamos worth it? Totally. I'm not arguing that they're not, but I would argue that the people who work in healthcare in America are comparable to what the people at Los Alamos are worth. Okay, next up, corporations in America. Okay, corporations in America pay other people, other vendors, gobs of money. Who do corporations in America pay tons of money to? They pay tons of money to corporate attorneys. The largest corporate law firm in America is called Kirkland Ellis.

The average income of a partner at Kirkland Ellis is $306,000 a year. You mean to tell me if corporations have enough money to pay corporate attorneys $306,000 a year, you mean to tell me they can't pay doctors and nurses and physical therapists and medical billers more to keep their employees and their employees' family members alive and healthy and working? So, fine. How are we going to pay for this? How are we going to pay for more healthcare costs? Because it needs to happen. Well, one, factory federal income tax needs to be higher.

We don't pay enough tax in America. We need to pay more. Now, believe it or not, back in the 1960s, the top tax rate in America was 91%. Now, Ronald Reagan came along and said, whoa, that's way too high. So there was a huge revolution in the early 80s to lowering taxes. Guess what the highest tax bracket was lowered to? From being over 90% to being 50%. Now, guess what it is today? In the 2020s, the highest tax bracket in America is less than 40%. Back in the 1960s, we had a booming economy. Like there wasn't any sort of like apocalyptic end to America with having the highest tax bracket being 91%.

We didn't bankrupt the country with the highest tax bracket being 91%. And here, the highest tax bracket is less than half of what it was when America was hugely prosperous back in the 1960s. So you mean to tell me that we can't raise the top tax bracket from 40% to increase it to pay all these healthcare workers at hospital systems more? That's ridiculous. We need to raise taxes to pay these people more. Okay, where else are we going to get the money? From corporate profits. Corporations in America are rolling in dough, in cash money.

The corporate profit margin in America in the 1980s was 10%. Guess what it is today in the 2020s? It's 17%. It's 70% higher than it was in the 80s with like the movie like Wall Street and all that greed and all that money slashing around in the 1980s. That was with corporate profits at 10%. And now they're at 17%. In terms of actual dollars, in 2022, the most recent year I could find, corporate profits were $3 trillion. You mean to tell me that corporations can't pony up some of that $3 trillion to pay for hospital labor costs? Corporations in America are frankly short-changing hospitals and they need to pay them more.

Okay, $3 trillion by the way, that's $9,000 for every man, woman and child in America of profit that could be spent on healthcare that is not. And arguably, a lot more needs to be paid on this. So, a lot of people say, healthcare in America, it's terrible. It's so hard to get an appointment. The quality is all over the place. It's, you have to fill out all these forms. The software and all the computer systems are antiquated. They still use fax machines. Well, I say to you, look, you get what you pay for. And this $4.5 trillion is not nearly enough to get you, America, the type of healthcare that you want.

So, it's very simple. Sometimes to make things better, you just got to throw money at it. And frankly, healthcare in America, healthcare costs in America need to go up, not down. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

