Title: Health Insurance Carriers_ 48_ of ACA Members_ 13_ of Medicare Advantage and 18_ of Employers Switch_cRzA5aL-oHk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cRzA5aL-oHk
Language: en
Duration: 7:34
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is switching in health insurance. So, there's an area in health insurance where there's a lot of switching between health insurance plan among buyers. And that is in the ACA marketplace. So, 43% of people in the ACA marketplace switched. Alright, that's a lot of people. It's almost half. Okay, well how does that compare to other areas of the health insurance marketplace? So, 13% switched in Medicare Advantage. Now, 11% switched to a different Medicare Advantage plan and 2% switched from Medicare Advantage to traditional Medicare.

Okay, so that's a lot less. 43% versus 13%. Okay, now, 18% of employers switched to a health insurance care. Okay, again, that's a lot less than that 43% of individuals on the ACA marketplace exchanges. So, here we have a part of the health insurance marketplace where there's a lot of switching. There's a lot of choice going on. But, you've got these other areas of health insurance where there's not a lot of switching going on. Okay, what's going on? Well, it's important for us to break this down by one, the Medicare Advantage market is a business to consumer market.

Whereas, the employer market for health insurance is a business to business market. Okay, well let's look at the ACA marketplaces and let's figure out why they're switching to start. Okay, so in the ACA, and oh by the way, all this data comes from the Kaiser Family Foundation. I will leave a link in the show notes to it. So, in the ACA marketplaces, of the people that switched, they saved an average of $504 per year on the premiums. Okay, once we think about our regular consumer experiences, why do we generally vote with our feet as consumers? To save money, right? You get a product or a service of equal or better value and it's much cheaper, right? So, probably the A number one reason that people switch ACA marketplace exchange plans is because they can save money, which makes a lot of sense too because these tend to be poorer Americans who don't have a lot of money to begin with, so they're very sensitive to the premium.

Now, for Medicare Advantage, when they switch, they only save about $210. So, the amount of savings or rather the impetus or the motivation to switch is not as much, alright? Now, that brings us to my third point, which is okay, well if the Medicare Advantage folks and the employers are not switching as much, why? Well, in order to switch, you need to have two things. It's essentially a behavior change, right? You have to want to switch and you can. You have to have the ability to switch. In other words, you have the motivation and the ability.

And that brings us to the BJ Fogg model of behavior change from Stanford University. I'll leave a link in the show notes to the A Healthcare Z video about that as well. But in order to change, you have to have motivation and ability. Alright, well let's look at motivation and ability for Medicare Advantage and the employer space to figure out what's going on. Okay. Well, in the Medicare Advantage place, they, you know, it's likely that they're not switching because they don't want to. I mean, they have a lot of choices.

So, on average, your typical Medicare Advantage enrollee has a choice between seven different companies, seven different insurance companies offering them plan options, okay? And 24% of Medicare Advantage ones, they have 10 or more options. So, there's quite a few options to pick from if you're a Medicare Advantage member. Okay? Now, if you're an employer, it might be that they just can't switch, right? Because 50% of employers actually go out and shop their insurance every year. However, when I say they can't switch, I mean they don't have options, right? It's Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna.

And, weirdly, with those four, it's really not so much the insurance company as much as it's the network discounts, right? Because you could say, oh, they could switch to a TPA. Yeah, but the TPAs are basically using, like, well, especially two of those, are using basically two of those network discounts. So, as far as, like, your access to network discounts goes, like, you don't have a lot of options. You got four. All right. So, now, we said here that the Medicare Advantage folks had a choice of seven different firms.

Okay. Well, if you're an employer, your choice is only four, all right? Now, that makes a huge difference. Let me give you an example of why that makes a huge difference, okay? What major state in America has much lower healthcare costs than the rest of America? California. What does California have? It has five choices. So, just the addition of Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna, and Kaiser adding a fifth choice. And they don't need a network because they own the docs and the hospitals. But just that addition of that fifth choice dramatically lowers the cost of healthcare in California.

It's much lower than it is in the rest of America. Now, if one option decreases your choice, decreases your cost, think about what seven options does for those Medicare Advantage folks. So, what's my point? My point is, is that presidential candidate Joe Biden just released his official policy statement on healthcare. And here we are approaching the middle of July 2020. And the central piece of his healthcare proposals is the public option, right? So, the point is, is that especially in the employer's place, you don't have a lot of options.

So, there's three ways you can get more options. You can either have new entrants come in, you can split up the existing companies, or you can have the government create an option. Okay, so, now obviously, because I promote Oscar health insurance, I think having new entrants come into the health insurance place is a great idea. Because if you can get more competition, and more people voting with their feet, or more companies voting with their feet, then that's going to improve service and decrease costs, right? So, I'm being for a more competitive environment.

Okay? Now, essentially, the Biden campaign is saying the same thing. They also want a more competitive environment. They also want a more competitive environment. And they're essentially going to do, essentially what, exactly what Oscar's doing. They're going to create their own option. And arguably, like, because there's so much switching going on in the ACA marketplace, like, they got choice. Like, you almost, you don't necessarily need more options in the, in the ACA marketplace, because people are voting with their feet and they're saving money.

That's called, you know, the marketplace working, right? It's not perfect, but it's working. Okay? Really, who needs options are employers. And so, of course, I don't know the future. I don't know what's going to happen. This is not a political post. But the point is, is that there's a difference in switching between the insurance marketplace versus Medicare Advantage versus the employer marketplace. Two, the reason why there is a difference in the switching is because, well, for Medicare Advantage, it's probably because they don't want to switch.

And in the employer, it's because they don't have an option to switch. And therefore, by potentially, presidential candidate Biden creating a choice to switch. Of all of these different areas, that is going to dramatically impact the employer market more so than any other. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Thank you..

