Title: Healthcare Out-of-Pocket Costs_ 4X What People Can Afford_PkVvIVIJ8XM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PkVvIVIJ8XM
Language: en
Duration: 7:36
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is excessive health care out-of-pocket costs. So now, of course the out-of-pocket costs are the costs that an individual or a family are responsible for even when they have health insurance. Now, according to the Federal Reserve, 36% of Americans would have a hard time paying just $400 of unexpected bills, including $400 of unexpected out-of-pocket costs. Now, the problem is that the out-of-pocket costs for the majority of health insurance plans in America are far in excess of the $400 that would be really hard for over a third of Americans to pay for.

So what's a specific number around that? So, the Kaiser Family Foundation, which of course all of you are very familiar with, does all sorts of employee benefits surveys and they found that the average individual deductible for an employer-sponsored health plan is $1,669. It's almost $1,700. It's more than four times what 36% of people are unable to afford to begin with. So this gets us to the fundamental purpose of insurance. I mean, what is the definition of insurance? I mean, we've got car insurance, we've got homeowners insurance, we've got renters insurance, you might have motorcycle insurance, there's all types of insurance, right? What is insurance? Insurance is the transference of risk.

Specifically, the transference of financial risk, right? You crash your car, you're not financially responsible for completely repairing your car, completely repairing the other person's car if you damage it, right? It transfers the financial risk associated with driving your vehicle. Okay, so, the problem with health insurance is, you know, people will use the term, like, underinsured, but arguably, most health insurance, the way that it's set up today, is essentially non-insurance. I mean, specifically, let's say you just didn't have health insurance at all.

So, you basically would be trying to not drown in 100 feet of water. Okay, and then, you know, someone comes along and says, look, we're going to give you health insurance. And instead of treading water in 100 feet of water, you only have to tread water in 17 feet of water. Well, shoot! That might not be very helpful, especially when 36% of people will drown in just 4 feet of water. So, if 36% of people are going to drown in 4 feet of water, then going from 100 feet of water to 17 feet of water doesn't help too much.

So, of course, all I've done here is lop off a couple of zeros, right? So, if you can't swim in 4 feet of water, being in 17 feet of water is no different than being in 100 feet of water. So, it's essentially not really helping you very much. So, the point is that you're still going to drown. And, in fact, so not only do 36% of people have a hard time paying $400 of unexpected bills, the median household savings in America is only $4,500. It's only $4,500. Shoot! You can easily have family deductibles of $4,500.

You can easily have individual out-of-pocket maxes when you include the coinsurance that are in excess of $4,500. So, essentially, even when you have health insurance, it could completely wipe out your life savings from half of American households! Okay? So, what, okay, so, like, okay, but listen, people got to get by, they got to do what they got to do, they got to find some solution. What's one solution they go to? They're credit cards. Now, I'm sure many of you are familiar with all the statistics involved with credit card debt being used to spend on healthcare expenses.

Well, shoot, that's an incredibly costly way to pay for healthcare, right? Because the average credit card interest rate is 14.6%. Now, what are you getting in your savings account? Certainly, what you're getting paid from the bank is not 14.6%, but what you're having to pay to the bank, if you have a credit card and you can't pay off the balance, is 14.6%. So, the point is, is that, listen, and oh, by the way, a lot of people don't even know this, if you max out your credit card, like, let's say you actually, like, still make your monthly payments, but you just use up all of your credit limit.

Just using up all of your credit limit, in and of itself, damages your credit score. So, not only are you paying these high interest rates, but it's even harder to then get, you know, if you need another loan. Like, let's say, you know, a mortgage or whatever. Like, you hurt your credit score by having to max out your credit card. Okay? So, all of this, your health insurance and existing credit card financing still puts the vast majority of Americans in financial jeopardy when it comes to their healthcare expenses, right? It really, like, to a certain extent, I'm not sure.

So, in the employer parlance, it's referred to as benefits. I'm not sure, this is why people don't really feel like it's a benefit. It doesn't really feel like it's a benefit when it doesn't prevent you from drowning. You're like, oh, you only drown in 17 feet of water instead of 100 feet of water. Well, you're still drowning. So, it doesn't really feel like a benefit. So, of course, this is yet another problem that previous solutions that I've talked about here on A Healthcare Z will absolutely address. Things like having free primary care, either through an on-site clinic or near-site clinic or virtual primary care, it allows people to have access to a vast majority of healthcare.

Certainly, it's not going to cover everything. It's not going to cover surgeries. It might not cover having a baby, right? But huge amounts of healthcare and preventive care can be delivered for free. Many employers do it today. It's not some pie-in-the-sky solution. Employers do it today. Likewise, there are ways to build in alternative financing into the out-of-pocket expenses for employees in their families through your TPA. You don't have to be like, well, here's your deductible and your account insurance and your out-of-pocket max.

Good luck. You know, go to GoFundMe. Ask your friends and family. Use a credit card. No! You don't have to do that. You can build in much better financing than a 14.6% credit card through your TPA. So, what I want to leave you with is just some practical problems. This is not some esoteric, like, thing. It's just like, look, health insurance essentially doesn't function as health insurance. There are things you as an employer can do so that your healthcare coverage actually is a benefit. That's what I wanted to cover today.

And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

