Title: Health Literacy and Its Role in Financial Literacy_4NRwHnV_D40
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D40
Language: en
Duration: 12:50
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is health literacy, or as I like to call it, patient skill. Yes, in life we all have life skills. The ability to balance a checkbook and do your personal budgeting. The ability to use public transportation. I've lived in Chicago for years without a car. It takes skill to navigate the L in the buses and everything. Or on the flip opposite side, the ability to drive a car. The ability to plan a grocery shopping trip for healthy meals.

Look at all these life skills, right? Shoot, parenting is a skill. If you've got kids, it's a skill. Just like playing any sport. And you can be good at something or bad at something. And the same thing holds true for being a patient. Absolutely. I will tell you that I had patients that were very good at being patients. And I had patients that were very challenged by being patients. Now, what do we specifically mean by health literacy? That's kind of a wonky term. That's why I'm taking this time at the beginning to say this is really an issue.

Sort of like patient skill. I'm not saying that in a judgmental way. And we'll get more into that later. Okay. So, the official definition from the government, of course, is health literacy is the capacity to obtain, process, and understand health information to make decisions. Isn't that interesting? And it's totally true that people, patients, have varying levels of health literacy. In other words, they have varying levels of abilities to make effective decisions. Like for themselves. Now, person A and person B can choose two totally different things.

But the point is, is that decision the right decision for them? Well, shoot. That's a skill. It requires you to obtain information. It requires you to process information. It requires you to understand information. And I can give you gobs of examples of people totally messing that up. So, what are some, and other people who, by the way, have done a great job with it. So, what are some things that are associated with low health literacy? It's been sort of identified as a national problem that we have here in America.

One, as you can imagine, poverty is associated with low health literacy. Low levels of education, specifically not having a high school degree, is associated with low health literacy. Insurance status is associated with low health literacy. Interestingly, having private commercial health insurance, those folks actually have higher levels of health literacy. Whereas people on Medicare and Medicaid actually have lower degrees of health literacy. Associated with poverty, most people who are on Medicaid are poor.

And then also, we'll get to people over the age of 65. So, being older is actually associated with low health literacy. Guess what? Being male is associated with low health literacy. Bunch of Neanderthal folks, us males, not as good at it as women. Now, English as a second language, also associated with lower health literacy. Okay, so why does it matter? So, yes, there's varying degrees of patient skill. So what? Why does it matter? Well, low health literacy is associated with things like higher degrees of hospitalization, higher degrees of ER utilization, lower degrees of breast cancer screening in the form of mammograms, decreased levels of flu shots, decreased degrees of medication adherence.

And this is from what's referred to as a meta-analysis, which is a study that looked at 81 different studies of health literacy to see how it impacted medical care. Now, so fine, so there are people that have low health literacy, it impacts the way they use healthcare services and their health. What can be done about it? Well, there are interventions that can be done. And it's interesting, they're kind of broken down into three buckets. So one is the, obviously, is the clinician-patient level. So the way that doctors and nurses and pharmacists and therapists, et cetera, et cetera, interact with patients, then obviously there are things that the clinician can do just in terms of not using jargon.

Or if you do have to use medical jargon to, like, explain what that medical jargon is. Even the speed of your speech should be done more slowly so that people can absorb the information that you're telling them. A lot of people, myself included, who work in healthcare, we tend to talk too fast. And by talking more slowly, not in a pejorative way, but frankly in just a more appropriate way, then guess what? That helps the patient better understand so that they can make better decisions. It helps them with their health literacy.

So fine, that's what you can do at the clinician-patient level. But there's also, and people, you know, I kind of intuitively, okay, well, you kind of stop there. Like, it's kind of up to the doc and the nurse, you know, pharmacist, et cetera, et cetera. And that's all you can do. And interestingly, the literature says no. There's more that can be done. There are things that can be done at the system level. And by system, it could mean hospital system level. It could mean insurance system level. It could be employer system level.

And just in terms of the overall community. And specifically for these system and community level strategies for, or for interventions for improving health literacy, it's important to have what? Again, this is what the literature is saying. This is good. It's good to have the education be clear. So education is effective and it needs to be clear. Aha! What am I doing right now? I'm sending you a video. You're watching me on video. Video is a fantastic way to provide information. Like, think back to the 1940s and 50s.

Like, did people gather around their living rooms to look at a book? No. When the TV was invented, it became the focal point of the household. Because video is so much better than written materials. They didn't invent the TV in the 1940s like, oh, I'm just going to sit around the radio and read books all day. No. All of the world's eyes were glued on video. And now you can have that video anytime, anywhere, on any subject that you want. Given the smartphone, internet, YouTube, etc. Next up, visual aids. This ties into the video.

Our brains are plugged in to respond to human faces. So, if you're going to educate people, it's super important to have a human face communicate to another human. So, sometimes I'll see these cartoons where it's like a blanked out face. That's horrible. Like, you should never do that. To the extent that you can use an actual face, then you're just... People's brains are hardwired to pay attention to people's faces. So, use faces. Use them. Use what our brain is accustomed to. Next up, the communication, the education needs to be shame free.

It needs to be non-judgmental. Like, so there's different degrees of health literacy. There's different degrees of patient skill. It doesn't mean you're a bad person. It doesn't mean you're dumb. It means that you have a different level of skill. I mean, it's a natural fact. It doesn't... You know, it's... You're not a bad person. But there are things that can be done to improve the skill. That's it. And that improvement of the skill... I'm sure all of us have had good coaches and bad coaches. And we can be coached in a very non-judgmental way to say, Look, you're not a bad person, but let me show you how to play tennis.

You're not a bad person, but let me show you how to hit a baseball. That's all we're saying here is, look, there are skills that will help you with your health. And I want to help you with that. You're not a bad person, but let's work on it together. Now, I want to add that this whole idea with health literacy, you can add, because this is a healthcare financial education channel videos, healthcare finance videos, just put the word financial health literacy in front of there. Because that absolutely is a skill as well.

So it's not just about congestive heart failure and cholesterol levels and multiple sclerosis and Crohn's disease and all this sort of stuff. It's also about things like deductibles and coinsurance and your EOBs and itemized bills and prior authorizations and all the things that are related to the financial health literacy. And guess what? There is financial health literacy out there. And in fact, Marshall Allen, who used to be a ProPublica healthcare journalist, he actually even was a healthcare journalism professor in New York City.

And he is now created the Allen Health Academy that does financial health literacy education. It's a 16 video curriculum. I've watched these videos myself. They're fantastic. I have no financial connection whatsoever to Marshall Allen or his academy. Now, I know Marshall. He's a friend of mine. But I will tell you that there are absolutely things that in terms of like, believe me, at Compass helping over 1.8 million people navigate their health insurance and healthcare over 11 years, we encountered gobs of people who had very low levels of healthcare financial literacy.

Very low levels of financial skill when it came to healthcare. Now, there are things that can be done about that. And in fact, incorporating healthcare financial literacy into corporate wellness programs, in my opinion, should be required. Because you have things like biometrics. You've got things like your health risk assessment. You're gathering data. But then it's like, okay, well, what do I do with that data? Right now, employers kind of assume that their employees know what to do with that data. And same thing like, okay, here's an EOB.

Here's a bill. Like, we sort of assume that you, as a plan member, know what to do with that data. And guess what? Fast between time, people have no clue what to do with that data. So I hate to say it, we're going to end with an analogy with math. And you probably remember from back in grade school, there's an equation for a line. Y equals MX plus B. Right? And say, okay, fine. Draw the line. Well, look. You've got to know M and you've got to know B. So that's like going out and getting your, you know, M is maybe that's your biometrics.

And B, maybe that's your health risk assessment. Or maybe M is your EOB and B is the actual bill from the doc or the hospital. So fine. So you've got that information. You've got the biometrics. You've got the EOB. But now you're like, okay, you've got the information. You should be able to draw the line. Well, you have to teach the student how to use this equation to draw the line. B is the Y axis intercept. Right? So if B equals one, then it's going to intercept on the Y axis of one. And then M is the slope of the line.

So if M equals two, for every one you go over on the X axis, you're going to go up two on the Y axis. So you get this line from that equation. Okay? If you don't teach people health literacy, if you don't teach people financial health literacy, then you're giving this, you're giving people this equation and not teaching them how to use it. You're giving people these data points of M and B and you're not teaching them what to do with it in order to actually draw the line. So, in practical sense, health literacy and patient skill can be taught.

And that's the point I want to make today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare to See..

