Title: Healthcare Spending Study in JAMA_MtAWvcIkhyg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MtAWvcIkhyg
Language: en
Duration: 4:13
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is US healthcare spending study from the Journal of the American Medical Association or JAMA. And it was published in March of 2020. And so it sort of got caught up with all of the coronavirus that came into the news and into the journal publications. But it's really a fantastic article and it has profound implications for employer-sponsored health plans. So, total spending as of 2016, which is the most recent data for the study, was $1.3 trillion total in America.

So commercial, government, out-of-pocket costs, right? It was 18% of the GDP and it amounts to $9,600 per every single person in America. Now, they break it down by payer source. So employer-sponsored health plans were the largest at 48% of the total spend. Government was 43%. And then out-of-pocket costs was the balance. Now, if you use the Kaiser Family Foundation numbers, there are 157 million Americans that are on employer-sponsored health insurance plans in America. So, what the article then does is it breaks down the spending by clinical diagnosis, which is super helpful for employers.

So let's go through that now. So, number one in terms of spending was low back pain and neck pain, which was $77 billion a year. And this is just for commercial insurance spent. So, all these numbers here are just for employer-sponsored health plans. No government, no out-of-pocket costs, okay? Now, that breaks down to $490 per member per year. Now, number two, closely related, musculoskeletal. $73 billion a year for employer-sponsored health plans. That comes up to $465 per member per year. So, you add the $490 to the $465 because they're so closely related, right? So, it could be knees, hips, spine, neck, ankles, elbows, shoulders, etc.

It comes out to $955 per member per year. So, in other words, just under $1,000 per member per year. Number three was diabetes at $49 billion a year for employer-sponsored plans, which comes up to $312. Now, it drops off relatively quick after that. So, let's look at the implications for these top three. Well, first and foremost, it's important to note that, look, there is time to intervene on these, okay? It's not trauma. It's not even heart attacks. It's not strokes, okay? Like all these low back, neck, and musculoskeletal things, people are dealing for this for the most of the most of the most, for weeks or for months.

It's not an immediate thing, so there's time to intervene. Two, it's elective tests and elective procedures. Again, this is not emergency stuff. There is time for some sort of intervention. And then number three, look, the specialties that are involved in this care are essentially orthopedics, neurosurgery, anesthesia, which is pain management, and then PM&R, which will do pain management as well. So, you're talking like really two specialties, and at the most four, that you're dealing with across your patient population.

So, as an employer, if you want to, you know, like robbers, you go where the money is, which is at the bank, right? So, where's the money? The money is in low back, neck, and MSK, right? That's where the money is. So, and I've talked about it on A Healthcare Scene many times, and you've heard it yourself, second opinion programs, centers of excellence, bundled payments, direct contracting. I'll post the video link to the Walmart program results, but there are many employers that have used this results.

So, if you're a broker consultant, or you're HR, or CFO, and you're thinking to yourself, okay, what is the first thing that I want to do to have the biggest impact on healthcare costs? It's low back, neck, muscular, skeletal. Low back, neck, muscular, skeletal. Low back, neck, muscular, skeletal. That's what you do first. Even in fully insured employers that are fully credible, where you have no data. So, you don't even have to analyze the data, because chances are, your employee population is probably going to be like this.

So, you're like, oh, we don't have the data to analyze it, so we don't know what program would be effective. Baloney! You're probably like this. Low back pain, neck, and MSK with these interventions. So, that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

