Title: Healthcare Money Campfire Stories Audio Book - Chapter 8_3p9cFIqbDi0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3p9cFIqbDi0
Language: en
Duration: 8:18
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Healthcare Money Campfire Stories by Eric Bricker, MD. Chapter 8. Have you ever seen that before? It was my second to last call in the ICU toward the end of my final year of residency. In the past three years, I had seen a lot. I had seen a 19-year-old college student with an infected blood clot in her neck and lungs go from being intubated on a ventilator and having only about a 33% chance of living to walking out of the hospital three weeks later. I had also seen people pass away. High highs and low lows. In the Hopkins Medical ICU, there were two senior residents who would take call with two interns overnight.

One intern for each resident. The two teams of two would alternate taking admissions to the ICU either from the ER, transfers of worsening patients in other parts of the hospital, or transfer ICU patients from community hospitals to Hopkins. My fellow resident had just taken an admit and now I was up. I received a call from the ER about a new patient. Mr. L was a 42-year-old male IV drug user with a fever, elevated white blood cell count, possible pneumonia on chest x-ray, and positive blood cultures for bacteria.

His blood pressure was in the 100s over 60s, tachycardic at 120 beats per minute, and he had already received two liters of IV fluid. Antibiotics had been started. The ER had already put in a central line as well, since they had trouble starting a peripheral IV. His blood pressure had been trending down. He had been in the ER for a while. They wanted to admit to the ICU for sepsis. I said I'd be right down to see him. He possibly had endocarditis, an infection of the lining of the heart. A person can contract endocarditis from shooting drugs with a dirty needle.

Bacteria on the needle travels through the bloodstream and attaches to the lining of the heart. From there, it multiplies and jumps back into the bloodstream to travel to other parts of the body. If he had pneumonia too, it might be from the same bacteria spreading from his heart to his lungs. When I saw Mr. L in the ER, he was receiving oxygen through a nasal cannula on his face. He was covered with blankets. He was shivering mildly, but otherwise looked relatively comfortable. His eyes were open. He was able to shake my hand and tell me his name.

That's a quick test of blood flow to the brain and mental function. If you can shake someone's hand, your brain is working well enough to recognize a social gesture, move your hand, and coordinate it so that it reaches the other person's hand. That's a pretty complicated thing to do. It was a good sign. Mr. L had this already happen several times. After speaking with him, performing a brief exam, and reviewing his labs and chest x-ray on the computer, I told the ER resident I would take him to the ICU. He did not look horribly sick, but he seemed to be heading in the wrong direction.

Things could get worse before they got better. I went back up to the ICU. It takes a while, but eventually I saw the computer that he had been assigned to a bed in the ICU, and I could begin entering orders. Nothing happens until the patient gets assigned to you in the computer. I waited some more. He was brought up to the ICU by patient transport and the ER nurse. At this point, he had received another liter of fluid, and he had another bag going, wide open. He was still awake, and I quickly told him that the ICU will get him settled in his room, and I would come see him shortly after.

The routine is for the ICU nurse to take about 10 minutes to get the new patient hooked up to the monitors, start the admin orders that I had entered into the computer, and do their own assessment. His nurse was also in her mid-40s. She only worked nights. Many nurses work either just days or just nights. I had only shared one patient with her before when our shifts had coincided, but I had seen her there many times and knew that she had worked in the Hopkins ICU for a long time. When she connected Mr. L to the monitors, I could see the results at the nurse's station where I was sitting.

His ICU room was about 20 feet away, three rooms down in the corner of the unit, so I could not see him from where I was. His heart rate was 125 beats per minute, and there was no result for his blood pressure yet. The nurse cycled the blood pressure cuff. It read 90 over 40. That was low. Not good. I go in to see Mr. L and the nurse. Given that his blood pressure was too low, I asked the nurse to put his IV fluids in a pressure bag and start another bag of IV fluids. He was probably going to need vasopressors, powerful IV medications that caused the heart to artificially pump harder to keep the blood pressure up.

We were taught to fill the tank first before starting the vasopressors, meaning to make sure the patient had enough IV fluids first to make sure the vasopressor medication was as effective as possible. Mr. L's eyes were still open. He was shivering more. He looked scared. I could hear his muffled voice through the face mask. I don't feel good. I'm sorry, Mr. L. We're going to give you more fluid to bring your blood pressure up. It's a little too low right now. That's probably why you're not feeling well. He nodded his head like one who would acknowledge understanding.

What else do you need? I asked the nurse. The ICU nurses often have additional orders that they need for a patient, and I wanted to make sure I put those in the computer too. As soon as I said this, Mr. L began to shake more violently, both arms and both legs. The nurse and I both looked at him. One second later, we saw both of his arms start to slowly rise from his side while still shaking. His legs started to rise off the bed too. Only about three or four inches, but we could see the blankets rise from his feet underneath.

One more second passed. His arms rose higher and higher. They were pointed straight toward the ceiling, still shaking, and his back began to arch. It looked like someone was pulling up his body from strings coming down from the ceiling. Then, beep! It was the well-known and dreaded sound of the monitor when it goes from registering the rapid beat of each heartbeat to the long constant beep when it can no longer pick up heartbeats. The nurse and I instantly locked eyes. Call code, I told her. She flipped the blue switch on the wall that activates the code alarm in the ICU.

The rest of the night was a blur. We brought his heartbeat back and he was intubated and put on a ventilator. His heart stopped again. We coded him again. His heart started beating again. Repeat the cycle about three more times over the course of the night. Amazingly, the last time, his heart kept beating and stayed beating. At Mr. L's bedside, the nurse took a few minutes to arrange his IV lines and straighten up the mess of supplies that is typically created during a code. I'm there as well. It was quiet. I asked her, Have you ever seen anything like that before? What? You mean with his arms? Yeah.

No. I've been here for ten years and I've never seen that, she finished. I didn't say this, but it looked like Mr. L's soul was being pulled or rather ripped out of his body. He never regained consciousness. Sure, it could have been a seizure from low blood pressure to the brain, but it seemed awfully coordinated and purposeful for just the seizure. It was about 7 a.m. With a lot of people's help, we were able to track down Mr. L's sister. She had arrived at the hospital and was in Mr. L's room. She wanted to see him. We talked about what happened and what was going on.

I asked her what Mr. L would have wanted in this situation. She replied, If his heart stops again, let him go. His heart kept beating for about 20 more minutes. Then it stopped. He was gone. Lesson learned. There is something unseen in us. Our bodies are vessels for spirit. The business of health care is a business that contends with that spirit. An unseen power that we do not fully understand and that we cannot fully control..

