Title: Healthcare Uncovered Ep 1_ Why Skyrocketing Healthcare Costs Don_t Make_It_Into Doctor_s Pockets_g5LCTThPe30
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g5LCTThPe30
Language: en
Duration: 2:32
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Doctors, your claims are being denied by insurance companies. But by how much? More and more doctors are asking, where's my money? Let's find out. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and I'm also a health care finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially, and that's why I've partnered with KnowMeHealth to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. Insurance companies deny almost 20% of physician claims, mostly in error. There are many sources of denials. Most are fixable. For example, a practice in Florida relied on the hospital to obtain their prior authorizations, but the hospital put the prior off in the wrong field in the billing system for over a year.

So what do you do? The first step is to find out how much you are being underpaid. You are given gobs of reports by your billing company, but most don't answer this important underpayment question. Here's what to do. You need three things. One, the work RV used in a specific time period, typically one month. Two, the payment terms in your insurance company contract. And three, the collected amount for that time period. Here's a real world example. A practice in Florida did 5,700 work RVUs for their largest insurance company in December.

They should have been paid $334,000 for those RVUs. But instead they were only paid $311,000. Why? The insurance company denied 484 of their claims. Two additional details. One, you need this information broken down for each insurance company that pays you. Blue Cross, United, Cigna, Aetna, etc. Two, you need to separate commercial payments from Medicare Advantage payments, if the same insurance company is paying you both. And then track these stats for each of your payers monthly. Ask your billing company this question for each of your payers.

Underpayment can be measured and it can be fixed. It's a solvable problem. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker and this is Healthcare Uncovered, where we break down a broken system..

