Title: Healthcare Cost Geography_ Learn the 3 Least and 3 Most Expensive States in the US_Lun4mLiU-oc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lun4mLiU-oc
Language: en
Duration: 2:16
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing how geography affects healthcare costs. And so the company that I co-founded, Compass Professional Health Services, did an analysis of Milliman data where we analyzed which states were the least and most expensive in regards to healthcare. And so here we have, in terms of the least expensive states, we have one, Hawaii, which is 21% below the national average. And this is for commercially insured employers.

So this is not Medicare or Medicaid data. Two, Alabama and three, Arkansas. Notice that Alabama is 20% less, Arkansas is 15% less. There are multiple things that these states might have in common, but one of the things they have in common is that they are dominated by a single insurance carrier. Okay? Now notice here on the most expensive, where Minnesota is the most expensive state in America, with their healthcare costs being 42% above the national average. Alaska is at plus 40% and Wisconsin is at plus 30%.

And notice here on the most expensive, where these particular states are dominated by only a few hospital systems. So in other words, the least expensive states are dominated by one insurance company and the most expensive states are dominated by only a handful of hospital systems. So what this points towards or leads towards is that much of the expense challenge for a population depends upon the negotiating price power. Does it lay on the side of the health insurance company to bring prices down? Or does it lay on the side of the hospital system to raise prices? Now I'm not saying that I have all the answers to this problem today.

And I'm also not saying that geography alone is the root cause of healthcare cost differences. But it's important to know that it's not just the age, the gender, the medical conditions that your employees have. It's also where they live and the types of doctors and the types of hospitals around them that can dramatically affect their healthcare costs. And thank you for watching a healthcare Z..

