Title: Health Insurance Subject to Antitrust Law...CHIRA-Competitive Health Insurance Act Explained_w61PYcCpFeo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w61PYcCpFeo
Language: en
Duration: 3:24
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Doctors, how much do you know about CHIRA, the Competitive Health Insurance Act, passed in 2020 during the height of the pandemic? It's a game changer for doctors. And today on Healthcare Uncovered, I'm going to break it all down. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and I'm also a healthcare finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially, and that's why I've partnered with KnowMeHealth to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. Doctors, did you know that up until 2020, health insurance companies were exempt from federal antitrust laws? It's kind of crazy, right? For 70 years, the laws that prevent businesses from colluding and engaging in anti-competitive activity didn't apply to health insurance companies.

How is that possible? Well, way back in 1945, Congress and President FDR were swayed by state insurance regulators to pass what was called the McCarran-Ferguson Act, which made insurance regulated by the states and not the federal government, essentially exempting insurance companies from federal antitrust laws. As you can imagine, doctors, hospitals, employers, and patients repeatedly tried to have the McCarran-Ferguson Act repealed. The last major push to repeal the law came in 2017 and failed. Big health insurance lobbyists always succeeded in pushing off attempts to repeal this sweetheart of a deal they had.

But then COVID hit. In 2020, during the height of the COVID pandemic, Congress passed and the President signed the Competitive Health Insurance Act, also known as CHERA, which ended most of the health insurance exemptions from federal antitrust regulations. What is particularly interesting is how CHERA was passed. CHERA is the exact same bill that failed back in 2017 when it was sponsored by a Republican. In 2020, the very same bill was sponsored by a Democrat, and it gained bipartisan support. When CHERA came to a vote in the Senate, it passed by a unanimous vote.

Everybody voted for it—Republicans, Democrats, and Independents. Who says we can't get anything done in America? After the passage of CHERA, the U.S. Justice Department issued a press release indicating it was interested in taking advantage of these new antitrust enforcement powers that it now wielded. The National Law Review published an article stating that CHERA would open the door for private litigation against health insurance companies for anti-competitive behavior as well. Now, what does all this mean for doctors? Well, two things.

One, it levels the playing field. Physician practices have always been subject to antitrust law, and now health insurance companies are as well. Two, a physician practice can now consider suing a health insurance company in civil court for damages caused by the anti-competitive behavior of a health insurance company. Doctors, you have rights. You can push back, and you can seek alternatives to the traditional health insurance payers. It's time to get more vocal about what's happening to you and your practice.

I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and this is Healthcare Uncovered, where we break down a broken system..

