Title: Health Insurance Case Management of NO USE in Acute Care Cardiovascular High Cost Claimant_0zQkCj6wj58
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0zQkCj6wj58
Language: en
Duration: 7:46
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing cardiovascular high cost claimants. So we talked about before how there are three major diagnostic categories for high cost claimants and those are orthopedic, cardiovascular and cancer. And we've talked a little bit about orthopedic so today we're going to talk about cardiovascular. And I wanted to couch that in a real life story of a patient that I had because I think it's very emblematic of a cardiovascular high cost claimant.

So this is the story of a middle aged woman who actually was born with a bicuspid aortic valve. So typically the aortic valve which is between the heart and the aorta to go out and distribute blood to the rest of the body, typically that aortic valve has three cusps or sleeves if you will. And this particular woman was born where it was just bicuspid. It's rare but it's not like unheard of. Okay? And so over time oftentimes these people have to have that valve replaced and replaced with a mechanical valve.

And she had had that done about five years before because she was having worsening shortness of breath and just an inability to really function very well. Okay so fine. So this was done in East Coast state. She subsequently moves to Texas. She works. She works for a very large employer, most likely on a self-funded plan. They have a major insurance network and insurance carrier that they have. And she goes to her primary care physician for a fever. Pretty high. It's like 102. And you know, no real obvious source. Maybe they thought it was upper respiratory tract infection or flu, what have you.

Sends her home. She still continues to have fevers. You know, upwards of 102, 103 for like a week. She's like something's not right here because if you have a fever that high, you're not feeling very good. So it goes back and listen, anytime you have a fever in somebody with a mechanical valve, you need to be concerned about endocarditis or an infected valve. And so they checked blood cultures. And again, they kind of just, you know, sent her home. But then they called her back within two days. And they said, you need to go to the hospital immediately because her blood cultures had grown out positive with a bacteria.

And it wasn't staph aureus. It wasn't one of the real common ones. But it was enough that, you know, of course, this is a very serious situation. Okay, so she comes in and she gets admitted to my floor. Okay, turns out she had, we ended up getting a CT scan on her in the hospital. Turns out she had a perivalvular abscess. Okay, so here's the heart. Here's the aortic coming off of it. There's the mechanical aortic valve. So she actually had pus around that mechanical aortic valve. Okay, and that is not treatable with just antibiotics alone.

So that needs to be surgically drained. And as you can imagine, the valve itself, because the valve itself was also infected, it needed to be replaced. And so, now this woman, incredibly fortunate because where I was, was actually associated with a dedicated, highly trained, special hospital for cardiothoracic surgery. And so, we, you know, we moved her over to that hospital. She got on the OR schedule and she had a, you know, highly skilled, very advanced cardiothoracic surgeon replace her aortic valve. Now, during the aortic valve surgery, which was like in excess of like six hours, it was pretty long, then she developed heart block, which means that the electrical impulses in her heart were not traveling appropriately.

So during the surgery, and this is not planned, and so during the surgery, the surgeon had to put in electrical leads to actually electrically shock her heart and stimulate her heart. It's almost like a pacemaker, right? So she had to have an external pacemaker. He did not fully close her chest wound because those were just temporary wires to kind of keep her alive. So I literally saw her, like the next day after she came out of the operating room and she was still intubated, she was still in the ventilator and she had wires coming out of her chest, literally.

And so the plan was to take her back into the OR the next day to actually put, and there's temporary wires that she just put on the outside of the heart, was to take her back the next day to take out those permanent wires and to give her a pacemaker because she was going to, so not only did she get a new mechanical valve, not only did she get her access strained, she had to get a pacemaker. Okay, what is my point here? Utilization management and case management are oftentimes what the carriers use for these complex cases.

And in this situation, at no point did utilization or case management from the insurance carrier have any impact on her care whatsoever, right? When you're in the hospital, like this is not where any sort of quote unquote input from anybody who's on the outside is really going to be in any particular use. So just know that for these cardiovascular high cost claimants, that case management and utilization management, in my opinion, are likely of very limited value. And so really as an employer, it's like, okay, well, what do you do? What can you do? And so this is where I would say it's really on the bookends, right? So it's on the PCP beforehand and it's on the follow-up care afterwards.

But we're really during the middle of the sandwich, if you will, during the actual episode, it's actually very little that you can do. And I would say that, you know, almost guaranteed the allowed amount, just for that one hospitalization alone, because by the time she was out, you know, excavated and out of the ICU and discharged, like it was, it was almost three weeks, maybe even closer to four weeks, right? So it was almost a month, including an ICU stay and a major cardiovascular surgery. So huge six-figure bill, right? So, so what could have been done? Okay.

At the end of the day, was this a huge miss by the PCP? Well, I won't say it was a huge miss by the PCP, but in retrospect, if you have somebody coming in with a mechanical heart valve and no real obvious cause for fever, even if you do have an obvious cause for fever, you probably should check blood cultures on them to see if they have bacteremia or potentially endocarditis, because that's a big deal if you have a mechanical heart valve, okay? And then second of all, so she was actually super lucky in that she was already tied in with a cardiothoracic surgeon at a facility that has dedicated cardiovascular, cardiothoracic surgeon nurses and actually a really big unit.

I mean, they actually do this fairly often. If she was at a small community hospital or a rural hospital or even an urban hospital that doesn't do a lot of this, like very easily, she could have died. Like this is absolutely life-threatening. And at the end of the day, this was a fantastic outcome for this woman. I mean, she lived, she lived. Now, she was already kind of plugged into highly skilled follow-up care, but this is where for somebody, you would absolutely want to make sure that they were at a center of excellence or a center of value for follow-up care.

Likewise, if it's not a valvular problem, like the big things are like heart attack or, um, or atherosclerosis or, uh, coronary, um, coronary artery disease. And so there, if you have a heart attack, guess who has a lot of heart attacks? People who've already had a heart attack, right? And so these are people that when you see them in your claims, uh, et cetera, there needs to be a way one upfront to not just get them into a PCP. Like she actually saw a PCP, but not all PCPs are created differently or created the same.

So you want to make sure that you're getting people into high quality PCPs. And that's another conversation for another day. Okay. But that's what step one, step two is that look, if it happens, don't even try to intervene during the episode because it's really going to add no value. And then on the backend, we need to make sure that they are absolutely plugged in to the best possible care possible for their particular type of condition. Now, again, I won't, there's a bunch of different interventions that you can do to address that, but this is a framework for how to think about cardiovascular high cost clients.

And thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

