Title: Healthcare Uncovered Ep 2_ Denied Requests_ Medicare Advantage and the Rise of Prior Authorizations_5hwCF1HPjOI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5hwCF1HPjOI
Language: en
Duration: 2:55
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Doctors, why are you doing more and more prior authorizations every year? The answer is certainly not obvious. Today I'm going to lift the curtain on what's really going on. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and I'm also a healthcare finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially, and that's why I've partnered with KnowMeHealth to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. Almost 80% of practices say prior authorization frequency is increasing. In fact, prior authorization is the number one administrative challenge for practices.

But why? Why are prior authorizations growing? The main reason for growth in prior authorization is Medicare Advantage. When a patient size up for Medicare Advantage, the government gives a lump sum payment to insurance companies, and the insurance companies then control how much they pay doctors. Medicare Advantage is not your traditional Medicare. In Medicare Advantage, the insurance company has prior authorization requirements for imaging, like MRIs, tests like sleep studies, and procedures like knee replacements.

Traditional Medicare does not. Think about Medicare Advantage like a major dam blocking payments from the government to you. Doctors are getting just a trickle. Now, bear in mind that Medicare Advantage is growing like weeds. In 2010, only 25% of seniors were on Medicare Advantage, and 75% were on traditional Medicare. Today, it's almost 50-50. Medicare Advantage has grown from 11 million seniors to over 22 million. Why? Why is Medicare Advantage growing? Of course, it has to do with money. The government gives so much money to insurance companies for Medicare Advantage that insurance companies can frequently offer Medicare Advantage plans to seniors with $0 premiums, $0 deductibles, and no coinsurance.

Conversely, traditional Medicare has premiums plus deductibles plus coinsurance. The government gives so much money to insurance companies for Medicare Advantage that they can even offer additional benefits such as dental, vision, and hearing aid coverage. Some even offer free groceries. Your prior authorizations are going up because Medicare Advantage is going up, and it's only going to get worse. Medicare Advantage is projected to be 70% of seniors by 2025, with only 30% on traditional Medicare. There are alternatives.

There are sources of patient revenue that do not have prior authorization. You just need to look. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and this is Healthcare Uncovered, where we break down a broken system..

