Title: Healthcare Money Campfire Stories Audio Book - Introduction and Background_XFJiDG6Pvcg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XFJiDG6Pvcg
Language: en
Duration: 19:13
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Healthcare Money Campfire Stories, 16 Lessons in the Business of Healing, by Eric Bricker, MD. Read by Eric Bricker. Dedication to Lauren. Introduction. This book is a collection of brief stories. These stories were experienced by me personally. The stories are true, but the names of people and some organizations have been changed. The conversations are reproduced from my memory. This book is intended for people who are change agents in healthcare, health insurance, and employee benefits. The reason for reading this book is to see that the role of money in healthcare has more implications than meet the eye.

Going forward, I hope you will see additional implications of money in healthcare more clearly. Background. The mail had arrived. My welcome packet from college was by far the largest piece that day. I was accepted into the General College of Arts and Sciences at Northwestern University because I did not have a specific major in mind. In the forms I had to fill out, there was a checkbox to indicate if I was quote-unquote pre-med. The form said that if I was even thinking about being pre-med, then I should check the box so that a pre-med advisor could be assigned to me at the beginning of my freshman year.

The form said there was a lot of preparation that needed to start at the very beginning of college. I checked the box. That's how I became a doctor. Well, there's a little more to it than that. Our family lived in the suburbs of Washington, D.C. The National Institutes of Health, the NIH, were one town over. In school, I had always been interested in math and science. Our family attended church along with another family where both the husband and wife were researchers at the NIH. They had a son who was in Sunday school with me.

The wife knew I was interested in science, and during my sophomore year of high school asked me if I wanted to apply for a summer internship in her lab at the NIH. It sounded interesting, but more importantly, it was a job that paid, and it was in air conditioning. My only summer job plans were mowing our lawn and the occasional neighbor's lawn. The lab was run by a woman scientist. The woman from church reported to her. The PhD student who worked in the lab was a woman. The other summer intern was a woman from a local high school.

I cannot say enough great things about the great mentoring and influence that these women had on me. As one can imagine, the experience at the NIH opened my eyes to the amazing world of biological research. After that first summer and repeated summer internships in the same lab, I sat down with the director of our lab and told her that while the experience was cool, I think that was the word I used, I could not imagine working in a lab for the rest of my life. The work was repetitive and slow. My own impatience was too much.

However, I still thought biology, human health, and disease were fascinating. Well then, you might want to think about becoming a doctor, she counseled me. The thought had never crossed my mind. I'm not sure why. It was an interesting suggestion. I attended undergrad in the 1990s. I majored in economics simply because I needed a backup plan if I didn't get into medical school. The general opinion was that it was impossible to get into medical school. I figured with an economics degree, I could at least get a job.

When my senior year came, I wanted to join the Peace Corps before going to medical school. I filled out the application, did the interview, and figured I would be assigned to West Africa because I could speak a little French and the Peace Corps sent many volunteers there. My acceptance packet came. It was not West Africa. I had been assigned to Eritrea, a country in East Africa between Ethiopia and the Red Sea. In fact, Eritrea was a very new country. It used to be a part of Ethiopia and had recently fought for its independence.

Ethiopia wanted it back, and there was still active fighting. After some research regarding the war, I decided not to go. Again, I had a plan B in case I was not accepted into the Peace Corps. I would get a job, take the MCAT, the entrance exam for medical school, and attend medical school in two years. I had interviewed on campus for two jobs and gone to a second round interview for both. They were healthcare consulting jobs. I received one rejection and one acceptance. I asked the company that had accepted me, Stockham and Associates, if I could have until later in the spring to let them know my response.

They agreed. After saying no to the Peace Corps, I said yes to the healthcare consulting job and began work in August 1998. I worked for two years as a hospital revenue cycle consultant. That is, quote-unquote, industry speak, for showing hospitals how to bill and collect payment from Medicare, Medicaid, commercial insurance carriers, and patients themselves. In the 1990s, the internet was still new, so most hospital billing was done on paper. Hospital billing offices were frequently a mess. Literally stacks and stacks of unsent bills and stacks and stacks of returned bills that had been denied payment for a myriad of reasons.

The hospital employees and management were doing the best they could, but the result was that many hospitals had to go 90 to 120 days worth of unpaid bills. In business, these unpaid bills are called accounts receivable. Stockham almost exclusively worked at large academic medical centers, which would generate about 1 to 3 million dollars of bills a day. Therefore, 90 to 120 days worth of bills equals accounts receivable of 90 to 360 million dollars. Having that much money in accounts receivable causes all sorts of cash flow problems for hospitals.

Some were even having trouble making payroll. The hospitals where I worked were nationally and even internationally known, some of the best in the world. I learned a lot. Just as importantly, I worked with amazing people at Stockham. It was a company of about 100 employees that was founded by a handful of people that had left one of the largest consulting firms in the U.S. At Stockham, I also worked with Scott Shane Vogel, who would eventually become my business partner and CEO of the company that we founded, Compass Professional Health Services.

Stockham no longer exists. It was bought by and folded into Huron Consulting, where many of the Stockham leaders still work today. I was living in Chicago at the time. Like many consultants, I would fly to the client site on Monday morning, stay at a corporate apartment during the week, fly home on Thursday night, and work remotely from my apartment on Friday. I would spend all day Saturday and Sunday studying for the MCAT and then later filling out applications for medical school. Eventually, the medical school requests for interviews came.

I interviewed at schools in New York City, California, and Chicago. At one interview in New York, my interviewer was a pathologist. We sat down and he said to me, I see here on your application that you are from Illinois. Do they have a state medical school in Illinois? I thought that was a funny question. Of course, Illinois has a medical school. Yes, I responded. He proceeded. You should go there. This medical school is very expensive. The cheapest medical schools are the state medical schools. Your education will be the same.

You can become whatever type of doctor you want. Go to the medical school in Illinois. Don't come here. Is there anything I can say to change your mind? I asked. No. We stared at each other for an awkward moment. My interview ended. I was disheartened to say the least. I had taken time off work to go to this interview. The flight had cost a lot of money. It was my first interview. I went to a handful of other medical school interviews, including the university of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, also known as UIC.

I was accepted at UIC and enrolled. The pathologist was right. The university of Illinois College of Medicine has several campuses across the state with the largest campus being in Chicago, where I attended. It is the largest medical school in the U.S., graduating about 400 new doctors every year. Ironically, the school's own hospital is small, not the behemoth academic medical center that most medical schools have. As a result, the school sends its students to hospitals all over the Chicago area for clinical rotations.

Cook County Hospital, the Westside VA, and community hospitals in both wealthy and poor parts of Chicago and its suburbs. This setup provides for great exposure to the diversity within the U.S. healthcare system, a setup that is unique among medical schools in the U.S. This benefit was just dumb luck for me, but it was the best possible experience to teach me about the variety of ways money impacts the practice of medicine. During the third year of medical school, students rotate through various specialties, surgery, pediatrics, OBGYN, internal medicine, etc.

My internal medicine rotation was at the VA. It convinced me to become a general internist. I loved the people. It was fun. My final year in medical school, I decided I wanted a career in healthcare policy research while on faculty at an academic medical center. It would be a path to help solve some of the problems I saw at Stockham while still seeing patients and teaching medical students. I loved medical school. I could be at medical school for the rest of my career. I applied to well-known hospitals for residency in San Francisco, Chicago, and Baltimore.

I was accepted at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. With its great reputation, proximity to Washington, D.C., and track record for working with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, CMS, it was a good fit given my interest in healthcare policy. I also was from Maryland originally, and my family was there. My intern year at Johns Hopkins was the worst year of my life. I would work at the hospital over 30 hours straight every fourth day and night. We had only four weekend days off a month. I was sleep deprived.

The hospital pace was so fast that there was never time to eat. I was hungry. My fellow residents were great, but we had few days off at the same time. When they were off, I was working and vice versa. I was lonely. I became short-tempered and better. I knew these were going to be the residency requirements, but knowing about them in theory and experiencing them are two different things. My second and third years of residency were much better. I met my wife Lauren. They say it's always darkest before the dawn, and that was the case for me.

I love her dearly. We have created a wonderful life together. After my intern year, I decided I did not want a career in academic medicine conducting healthcare policy research. During medical school, I kept in touch with Scott Schoenvogel from Stockham. We had one lunch in Chicago when he was there on a work trip, and I was in medical school. We had one phone call three years later when I asked him to help my roommate who was moving to Dallas where Scott lived. We had briefly talked about what we could do to help people in healthcare as a business.

In the fall of my second year of residency, I called Scott and asked him if he remembered our conversation. He had. Many phone calls later, and after Scott convinced his college roommate, Cliff Sintel, to join us, we formed a company, Compass Professional Health Services. Lauren and I married at the end of my residency. I found a part-time job at a hospital in a suburb of Dallas. Lauren and I bought a house one town over from the hospital. Compass was a healthcare navigation service for employer-sponsored health plans.

We knew people needed help with all the administrative work in healthcare and health insurance. Doing so would not only improve their care and make things easier, but also save money. Compass provided price transparency, quality comparisons, prescription drug cost reduction, benefit plan explanation, open enrollment decision support, appointment scheduling, and problem medical bill resolution. Compass was hired by employers to support their employees as part of their employee benefits package. That package of benefits typically included health insurance, dental insurance, vision insurance, other types of benefits, and Compass.

Employees and their family members interacted with our Compass health navigation experts, which we called health pros, by phone, email, and smartphone app. Historically, there was no administrative quote-unquote medical home for people and Compass filled that void. For example, many times when a person had a problem medical bill, they would call the insurance company, told it's not the insurance company's fault, and need to contact the doctor. When the person then contacted the doctor's office, they were told it's not the doctor's fault, and to call the insurance company.

Now the person was stuck in the middle with no one to help. Compass would step in no matter what, act as the ombudsman, and advocate on behalf of the person to solve the problem. Compass did not make medical decisions. We did not want to play doctor. However, Compass recommended doctors that met a person's specific needs. We then made sure their care was coordinated, administratively easy, and billed accurately. The trend in employee health insurance for the last 10 years has been consumer-directed health plans, also known as CDHPs, with a higher deductible and an associated health savings account or health reimbursement arrangement.

Traditional health insurance has little financial incentive for people or doctors to be good stewards of spending. The purpose of a CDHP was to change people's behavior to take care of their health better and be better consumers of the employer's health care spending and their own spending. If people were healthier and were less wasteful in using health care services, then they would keep more of their health savings account money every year to use in the future. That was the theory. It's debatable as to whether it has borne out.

Compass was the necessary member guidance tool to help employees with this new CDHP insurance plan. Compass grew to over 2,000 employer clients including Southwest Airlines, T-Mobile, and Chili's restaurants. Compass clients also included over 50 municipalities, major universities, manufacturers, banks, law firms, energy companies, and health care organizations themselves. Yes, hospitals and physician practices would hire Compass to help their own employees navigate the complex health care system that they themselves created.

I suppose that is the finest form of flattery. Across all those clients, Compass supported about 2 million people when you include the employees and their family members. As the chief medical officer of Compass, my responsibilities were in sales, marketing, and account management. When co-founding a business, nothing happens until something gets sold, as the expression goes. So I had to sell. With no previous experience in these areas, it was a crash course in self-education and a lot of trial and error. I would cold call insurance brokers and HR managers.

I'm probably one of the few physicians in America who cold calls. I created a lead generation list of over 10,000 contacts which I and a small team turned into leads for our sales team. I personally sold to insurance brokers, HR, and CFOs weekly for 11 years. I wrote a weekly blog for 10 years that eventually grew to 30,000 page views a month. We created a monthly educational webinar series that had upwards of 200 attendees per month. We created and trained an account management team to foster the success of our 2,000 clients.

I would negotiate contracts. It was an amazing front row seat to business and employer-sponsored healthcare in America. My responsibilities also included the clinical design of our service and its ongoing development. Compass could anticipate the specific administrative quality and cost challenges for patients given their medical situation. The administrative challenges for an expectant mother versus a person with a chronic disease like diabetes are very different. Likewise, the quality and cost issues for a person anticipating spine surgery versus a person needing a treatment facility for a drug addiction are also very different.

Compass tailored its non-medical healthcare support based on a patient's medical needs. It was exactly what people needed. Of course, I did none of these efforts alone. Scott Shanevogel, Cliff Centell, and our Compass executives, managers, and employees worked together as a team. Our Compass people worked hard, were smart, and most importantly, were beyond trustworthy. Even better, they were amazingly kind and pleasant. We grew to 300 employees. Compass was eight parts joy, two parts work. Compass was then purchased by Alight Solutions in the summer of 2018.

Alight is a 10,000 employee company that was created in 2017 when it separated from the international insurance giant Aon. Alight is the former Benefits Administration and Human Resources Outsourcing business unit of Aon and was sold to the private equity firm, the Blackstone Group. I left Compass and Alight in November 2018. I love spending time with my family and have been able to do so more since then. I also saw an opportunity to teach others what I had learned as a combined hospital finance consultant doctor salesman entrepreneur.

I had seen a lot. I wanted to share what I had learned. I started a healthcare finance video journal called A Healthcare Z. A Healthcare Z posts brief educational videos five days a week. The topics range from explaining how hospitals and insurance companies negotiate their prices, to how pharmacy benefit managers make money, to how medical coding works. The videos are uploaded to the ahealthcarez.com website and emailed to a list of subscribers and posted on LinkedIn. I chose LinkedIn since healthcare finance is mostly a business-to-business matter and LinkedIn is the top social media platform for business-to-business related issues.

The positive response has been more than I could have imagined. As of September 2019, A Healthcare Z has 80,000 video views per month across all platforms. Subscribers and commenters include insurance brokers, benefits consultants, hospital administrators, surgeons, primary care physicians, insurance carrier executives, drug company employees, human resources and employee benefits leaders, nurses, pharmacists, physical therapists, even university professors. Interestingly, there are many international viewers as well.

Many of whom are computer programmers in India that make software used in the U.S. healthcare system. My background has allowed me to see budgets being made, deals being negotiated, and patients being healed, or not. Healthcare and the role of money are not confusing. They make complete sense once you see the healthcare system from end to end. Let me tell you some true stories and let's learn together..

