Title: Healthcare Money Campfire Stories Audio Book - Chapter 5_eoMNdoefmkA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eoMNdoefmkA
Language: en
Duration: 13:51
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Healthcare Money Campfire Stories by Eric Bricker, M.D. Chapter 5. Sweet Jesus Mrs. B. was a woman in her late 60s who had come to the Johns Hopkins Emergency Department after being discharged from a hospital in Washington, D.C. two days prior. She had been having worsening abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. A CT scan at the hospital in D.C. had been read as quote-unquote pancreatitis, inflammation of the pancreas. Mrs. B. was admitted there for IV fluids and pain medication. After several days, she tried to eat some broth and could keep it down.

She was discharged home. This is typical treatment for pancreatitis. Once home, her abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting returned. Rather than take her back to the same hospital, her grown daughter decided to drive her up I-95 70 minutes to Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. Upon examination in the ER, another CT scan was ordered, and this time, it was not read as pancreatitis, but rather as pancreatic mass possible cancer. She was admitted to me from the ER on the third month of my intern year for further diagnostic workup, IV fluids, and pain control.

The gastroenterology GI doctors were called to evaluate Mrs. B. for possible endoscopy and biopsy of the mass. A definitive diagnosis of pancreatic cancer could only be made with a biopsy. It took a day for the GI doctors to see her, and she was put on the schedule for an endoscopy and biopsy in a couple days. I would examine Mrs. B. every morning around 6 a.m. and see her again on rounds with the internal medicine team around 11 a.m. I would see her a third or even fourth time during the afternoon and evening before I admitted new patients while on call in the hospital, went to my outpatient clinic to see patients in the afternoon, or went home.

There are many slang terms and idioms in the hospital. So, Mrs. B. had the, quote, positive nice person, end quote, sign for cancer. The origin of the expression being that it is frequently the nicest people that end up with cancer. You could tell Mrs. B. was a wonderful person because her middle-aged daughter was kind as well. She would smile at me and say, you're pretty good for a rookie. Mrs. B.'s kindness had been passed on to the next generation. Several days into her hospitalization, her heart rate suddenly jumped to about 120 beats per minute, up from about 70.

The ECG showed normal heart electrical activity, but a rapid rate, which is called sinus tachycardia. I took the ECG printout to my senior resident who was sitting with our attending physician. I addressed the senior resident and not the attending physician, as we were taught to follow the chain of command. I think she has a PE, I said. PE stands for pulmonary embolism, a blood clot in the vessels of the lungs. It often causes chest pain and shortness of breath, but it also causes sinus tachycardia. In fact, sometimes the only thing a PE causes is sinus tachycardia, and nothing else.

A PE originates as a blood clot in the legs, which then breaks free, travels back to the heart, and becomes stuck in the lungs when the blood is pumped there to be oxygenated. Well, if you think she has a PE, send her for a CT, said the resident. A CT scan of the chest is the standard test to diagnose a PE. Very little happens as fast as you would like as an intern. By the time Mrs. B had gone for her CT, I needed to leave the hospital for the outpatient clinic for about two miles away. While walking in the parking garage to my car, I received a page from radiology.

I called back to my cell phone. Your patient Mrs. B has a PE. It's big. I hung up, paged the intern who was covering for me in the hospital, and told her the results and to start Mrs. B on a heparin drip, the blood thinner treatment for a PE. I paged the senior resident as well to let him know. The next day, when I returned to the hospital, Mrs. B was in a different room because she needed to be on a cardiac monitor. Her heart rate was still about 120 beats per minute, as would be expected. The blood thinners don't dissolve the clot, rather they are an attempt to keep the clot from growing while the body forms a cap of fiber over the clot and shrinks it down over a matter of months.

It's not a quick fix. Later that afternoon, I received a page from Mrs. B's nurse. Mrs. B's blood pressure had dropped. The typical blood pressure is 120 over 80. Mrs. B's blood pressure was 90 over 40, but she was otherwise asymptomatic. I checked her blood pressure again myself. Same reading. Her PE was potentially growing to the point that it was blocking her blood flow through the lungs and causing her blood pressure to drop. IV fluids were started to raise her blood pressure. Mrs. B had been moved to what is called the step-down unit.

Step-down is a floor for patients that are more unstable than a typical patient in the hospital, but not so unstable that they need to be in the ICU. Again, nothing happens in the hospital as soon as an intern would like, so it took a couple hours for the room to be cleared and stepped down and for Mrs. B to be transported. At this point, it was about 8 p.m. in the evening. The nurse checked her blood pressure again. She was 85 over 40, and Mrs. B was looking a little sleepy, meaning not enough blood was flowing to her brain.

We increased the rate of the IV fluid she was receiving and told the nurse that I would put in an ART line. ART is short for arterial. An ART line is like an IV except it goes in an artery instead of a vein and is used to directly and continuously measure blood pressure. ART lines are routinely used in the ICU for patients with hypotension, low blood pressure, which Mrs. B had. ART lines are also more accurate than a blood pressure cuff. Frequently, when the cuff says one pressure, the ART line will read a little higher.

I was hoping that was the case. While it was only my third month as an intern, I had already put in three ART lines during rotations in the cardiac intensive care unit and the bone marrow transplant unit. In other words, I kinda knew how to do it. I gathered the supplies, taped Mrs. B's hand over a rolled up towel so that her wrist was bent back and pointed up. I sterilized her skin with iodine. While the iodine was drying, I set up the ART line kit, put on a sterile gown, hair cover, mask with plastic face shield, and sterile gloves.

The ART line looks like a long ballpoint pen with a needle tip. With one hand, you feel for the patient's pulse to locate the radial artery, and with the other hand, hold the ART line like a spear. You insert the ART line into where you feel the pulse. You continue pushing it in until you see a flash of bright red blood shoot up about one inch into the clear plastic tube behind the tip. You can even see that blood pulsate. You then slide a guide wire through the tip and into the artery. Next, you slide a small plastic catheter over the guide wire and slide out the sharp tip.

Once you do that, blood starts to come out of the open end of the catheter. You quickly grab monitor tubing that the nurse has set up next to you and screw the end of the tube onto the catheter. The monitor tubing stops the blood from flowing out and allows the blood pressure to be directly measured on the electronic monitor above the patient's headboard. You then suture the catheter into the patient's skin and cover it with a clear adhesive bandage. Here's the problem. ART lines are typically inserted when a patient's blood pressure is low.

If the blood pressure is low, their pulse is very weak so you can barely feel it through your sterile gloves. Sometimes you can't feel it at all. The radial artery is only a few millimeters wide so it's easy to miss. I was having this exact problem with Mrs. B. I could not feel her pulse. Mrs. B's eyes were closed. She was breathing shallowly and her mouth was hanging open. I had seen that look right before a patient was about to code. That's hospital speak for being on the verge of death. In that emergency situation, the code blue team is called to do chest compressions and shock the patient with a defibrillator if necessary.

Mrs. B's heart monitor still showed she had a pulse of about 100 beats per minute so I knew her heart was still pumping. I probably should have called a code anyway. I was having a terrible time trying to get the art line in. I had resorted to blindly stabbing into her wrist with an educated guess as to where her radial artery was. Stab. No red flash of blood. Stab. Nothing. Stab. Nothing. I was getting very hot in my gown. My hand was shaking. I was very nervous. Then I heard Mrs. B speak. Sweet Jesus, I ask you to help this young man.

Sweet Jesus, you are good and kind. Sweet Jesus, show him strength. Sweet Jesus, give him guidance. She continued. I felt emotion well up in me. My eyes teared. I had a hard time seeing. The tears rolled down my nose and dripped onto the plastic face shield of my mask. Mrs. B had spontaneously regained consciousness and was praying for me. I was not a spiritual person at that point in my life. I did not know where these feelings were coming from inside me. I got it. A flash of red blood. Pulsing red blood. I slid the guide wire through the tip.

It went in smooth and effortlessly. That was a good sign that I had reached the artery. I slid the catheter over the guide wire into the artery, removed the sharp tip, saw the blood come out, stopped the blood with the monitor tubing, and screwed it on tight. The nurse synced the monitor. It read 96 over 42. Low, but higher than the last cuff reading of 85 over 40, and high enough to deliver blood to Mrs. B's brain. I looked over at Mrs. B. Her eyes were closed again. I finished the art line dressing, tore off my gown and gloves, and went to the nurse's station and called the ICU.

I told the ICU resident the situation, and she said she would be right down to evaluate her for transfer. Meanwhile, the attending physician and senior resident were about to round on Mrs. B. I told them what had happened. They were pleased that I had called the ICU. The ICU resident arrived, went into Mrs. B's room, came out a couple minutes later, and said she would take her up to the unit. While all this was happening, I had been paged several times. My pager went off again. No time to reflect. I had to call them back and keep moving.

Mrs. B was now in the hands of the ICU. I spent the next hour wrapping up some loose ends with other patients and signed out to the on-call intern. I took Mrs. B off my list, which is what you did when your patient went to the ICU. When I returned to the hospital the next morning, I looked up Mrs. B in the computer to see what had happened overnight. At the top of the screen, in bright red letters, it read, EXPIRED. I was shocked. I knew it was early enough in the morning that the ICU resident who had taken her up to the ICU the evening before would still be there.

I called the ICU. The resident told me Mrs. B's blood pressure did not stay up for long and proceeded to go lower and lower. They had tried to give her powerful IV medications called vasopressors to make her heart pump harder to keep her blood pressure up. She had to be intubated. Her pressure kept dropping. She coded. Then they had started chest compressions and gave her more emergency IV medications to jumpstart her heart. She had come back, but her pressure started to drop again. They did several rounds of this process.

Code, compressions, pulse return, blood pressure up, and then down. Finally, the ICU resident had spoken with Mrs. B's daughter, who stayed all night, and she decided Mrs. B would not have wanted to continue. The codes were stopped. Mrs. B's pressure dropped again. Her heart stopped. She was gone at about 4 o'clock in the morning. Mrs. B had died from her P.E. Mrs. B was the first patient directly under my care during residency who died. I was totally demoralized. I was so sad for her, for her daughter, and selfishly for myself.

She had mustered her last strength to pray for me. Her sudden consciousness, my tears, getting her art line in, it all replayed in my mind. I kept staring at the computer screen. Mouth open. Expired. Lesson learned. Human suffering is serious. Death is serious. The term healthcare is somewhat of a glossy euphemism for human suffering and death. Accordingly, the influence of money and business in healthcare is serious. This, this program looks very foul. kit does not Быesta cause of life i am skeptical. But last time he sees so he is a apologies.

He needs to be developer. He can't help with anyone for uh or if the opportunity is to be especially aggressive. He can respond to some other changes. I'm afraid he just can now abandon us because he is not fair. He wants to make sure recovery of the people have failed. He can take care of mass rak to goП hin to Job this. You're not required to prepare for對比 suggesting a video especially in Canada. You have never tried happening. Seed which is a Production Program apparentlyК away. He could have threetrane for your website too.

He smelled the topic of Rut Ate..

