Title: Health Insurance Denials Contradict DEI_ ESG and Fairness Initiatives_Zq4Kxg0Ints
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zq4Kxg0Ints
Language: en
Duration: 11:50
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is health insurance opposes DEI and ESG initiatives. Now I'm going to start off today by telling you a story. It's a story that was recently published in ProPublica on February 2nd of 2023. It's the story of a Penn State student. And this poor young gentleman was denied coverage or payment for medical services for his ulcerative colitis. Now ulcerative colitis is an autoimmune disease that causes bloody diarrhea, horrible abdominal cramping and excessive weight loss.

So he lost like 50 pounds and he was constantly in the bathroom having bloody diarrhea and it was tremendously impacting his life. He had to take a ton of time off of school before he could even go back to college because he was constantly in the bathroom. Now he had seen a doctor in his local area who then referred him to a specialist at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center who couldn't even get his ulcerative colitis under control and then referred him to a doctor at Mayo and it was only this sort of like world's expert in ulcerative colitis at Mayo who was finally able to put together a treatment plan that was able to get this young gentleman's ulcerative colitis under control.

Now this treatment plan ended up costing $807,000 for like less than a full year of treatment. And his, the student's United Healthcare policy was through Penn State through the college that he went through and it was the Penn State's student health plan policy from United Healthcare that then denied the $807,000 of coverage for this medication treatment for his ulcerative colitis. So he was stuck with this huge bill. Okay, so why did United deny it? So ulcerative colitis, autoimmune disease, we've talked about how the specialty pharmacy, these biologic medications, these monoclonal antibodies are used to treat things like rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's and ulcerative colitis.

So he needed not only one of those medications, he needed two. And not only did he need two of those medications, he needed them at very high dosages. Now why did he need those two medications at very high dosages? Because his previous doctors had tried just one medication, it didn't work. They tried two medications at the regular dose, it didn't work. Only when they did the two medications at the higher dosages, did it actually work. So that he could actually go back to college. Okay, so fine. That was the special treatment protocol that he was put in place by this doctor of Mayo.

Keep in mind, this gentleman's in Pennsylvania. So we had to go out to Minnesota to get this special treatment from Mayo. Okay, so fine. This brings up the point of medical policy. Because all health insurance plans have something called medical policy. And it was the medical policy that United Healthcare used to then deny payment for the students' treatment. So what is medical policy? Medical policy is the fine print in everyone's health insurance plan that says you have You have health insurance, but, and the medical policy is all the buts about all the clinical situations and all the medical situations that you do not have insurance for.

So you think you have health insurance for quote unquote healthcare coverage, but there's gobs and gobs of healthcare that you do not have health insurance for. And it's outlined in the medical policy, which, oh, by the way, almost no one even knows about and even fewer people actually read. Because literally for health insurance companies, it's over 80 pages long. Okay? So, and oh, by the way, it's never explained to people when they sign up for insurance that you have insurance but, and the gazillion things that you don't have health insurance for.

It's really a black eye in the health insurance world that needs to be better explained to people that actually own the policies. Okay? So, part of medical policy is that, look, there's all sorts of exceptions to their rules, their medical rules about what they do and do not cover. So United's specific rule that applied to the student at Penn State was, look, we're not going to pay for these ulcerative colitis medications at those high doses. We're just not going to cover it per our medical policy. So there's always an exception process.

And that exception process is referred to as peer review. And it's a peer review because it's the peer, the patient's doctor, talking to another peer, another doctor that either works for the insurance company or who's contracted with the insurance company. And in the case of this Penn State student, it's with a doctor who was contracted with the insurance company. So, it's with this company called MRI of A. And they are actually based in Salt Lake City, Utah. And they contract not only with United, but their website actually claims that they work with insurers that cover 34% of Americans.

So over a third of Americans have health insurance plans that use this outsourced company where they basically crowdsourced tons of doctors across the country to then provide these peer to peer review with the doctors of the actual patients. So United's vendor, if you will, did the peer to peer and they did it multiple times. And one of the times, the doctor was in California with UCLA and he denied the treatment because he said the dosages are just too high. But then that company did another review with a different doctor in Illinois, both of which by the way, were gastroenterologists, right? So they were specialists in ulcerative colitis.

And that doctor in Illinois actually approved of it. He said, look, those lower doses for extreme cases of ulcerative colitis like this gentleman has, those lower doses might not work. And so you have to use higher doses. And oh, by the way, there's reports in the literature of those higher doses. Those higher doses are just being used and it not having adverse consequences. So yes, the higher dosages were outside of United's medical policy. But the point is, is that they had conflicting views of their own peer to peer doctors because they had two of them that then they get.

And so this is where United really got into trouble. They essentially buried the approval for the medication. And they then highlighted the fact that this one doctor in California had denied it. And they even misrepresented that denial and said that the doctor in California and the Mayo doctor had actually agreed to the lower dose together. And that's patently false. The Mayo doctor never agreed to the lower doses because he had tried the lower dose before. And they didn't work. So the point is, is that the, and of course, all this gets exposed in a lawsuit.

And there were obviously correspondence within United Healthcare where they were like, look, this higher dose of medication, it's hugely expensive. And so it was plainly obvious from the internal evidence within United that United was supremely concerned about the high cost that they were having to pay out for this gentleman's ulcerative colitis treatment. Okay. This is not new news. Okay. At the end of the day, there've been gobs of examples about medical policy and peer to peer review where essentially insurance companies deny to pay for treatment that a doctor for the patient themselves finds perfectly reasonable.

Okay. Not only for United, but for all health insurance policies, they all have medical policy that is not clearly explained and holds 80 plus pages of exceptions of how you actually don't have insurance. And then two, it has an outsourced third party peer to peer review process, which is subject to corruption. So essentially they had a corrupted peer review process that was focused on saving money for United over the patient's health because they had a doctor who actually sided with the patient's actual physician that would have been in favor of the patient's health and they buried it.

Okay. So then my point for the video today is, is that there are two large movements in America and even in the world. And those two huge movements are called DEI and ESG. What in the world are those? So DEI stands for diversity, equity, and inclusion. And many organizations, companies, universities, including Penn State, are trying to be more open to diversity. They're trying to be more equitable. They're trying to be more inclusive. So they have specific policies and departments committed to diversity, equity, and inclusion.

And by equity, what they mean is justice and fairness for the constituents of that organization, whether they be the students at Penn State or for the employees of the company. And the question is, is that look, at the end of the day, Penn State hired United. And Penn State has a policy related to DEI. And so the question becomes, is really having an insurance company that has medical policy and peer review like United, is that consistent with Penn State's DEI efforts? My answer would be, it does not check the box for equity.

Okay, now we move on for to ESG. What in the world is ESG? ESG is environmental, social, and governance investing. So ESG investing is where investors are trying to put their money into companies that adhere to certain principles around environmental sustainability, preserving the environment, not polluting, etc. around social justice and around governance. Now, specifically the areas around, interestingly, one of the measures of their sort of contribution to society or their social justice within their investing is, does the organization that they're investing in, does it have policies and procedures consistent with DEI? So there is where kind of the two, DEI and ESG, kind of interact.

So ESG investing has massively expanded. So it is now $17 trillion across the globe are directed in an ESG fashion. And in America, $400 billion of ETFs are actually directed in an ESG fashion. So the question is, can an investor who wants to invest in an ESG fashion, does the medical policy and the peer review approach of a health insurance company, does it really check the box for social? I would argue it doesn't. Likewise, DEI has grown tremendously, too. In 2018, only 27%, and this is of a global survey, only 27% of surveyed organizations had a DEI policy.

And as of 2020, 93% had a DEI policy. So here are two movements of DEI and ESG that have become increasingly popular. And listen, I think this is just a normal, like, growth of the movement. Okay, it's great to say DEI. It's great to say ESG. But it's not what we say. It's what we do. And so all organizations need to ask themselves, look, is our current arrangement with our health insurance company actually consistent with DEI and ESG goals? And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

