Title: Health Insurance Carriers Now Subject to Antitrust Regulation_AbOHzYTYbPM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AbOHzYTYbPM
Language: en
Duration: 6:03
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is health insurance is now subject to antitrust regulation. That's right, believe it or not, this is brand spanking new and most of us have never even heard this but we're going to go through it in detail today. Now this is the result of the Competitive Health Insurance Act otherwise known as CHIRA or CHIRA that was passed in, actually it was literally just passed in January of 2021. It started, they said it's of 2020 because that's when the legislature started to make its way through the House and the Senate.

Okay, how did this come to be? The House passed it in September of 2020, the Senate passed it in December of 2020, and President Trump signed it into law on January 13th of 2021? Like, after, like a week after January 6th when like the crowd, riots stormed the Capitol building? Like, no, of course nowhere was this in the news, but what's going on here? So, I gotta take you back in history. So, this act, the Health Insurance, the Competitive Health Insurance Act of 2020, it now ends the McCarran Ferguson Act of 1945 for health insurance and dental insurance.

Now, what does the McCarran Ferguson Act, what does it say? It says that insurance companies are exempt from federal antitrust laws. The Sherman Antitrust Act. The Sherman Antitrust Act can go after oil companies, it can go after software companies, it can go after steel companies, it cannot go after insurance companies, it could go after a law that was signed by FDR just before he died, while World War II was going on. And that stuck around for over 70 years. Okay, so, okay, interestingly, this, not a part of the Affordable Care Act in 2010, okay, you would think that the Affordable Care Act in 2010 would be like a perfect occasion to like say, okay, health insurance companies probably need to be subjected to the same antitrust laws as every other company in America.

But no, not a part of the Affordable Care Act of 2020, it's hard to say, okay, health insurance companies probably need to be subjected to the same antitrust laws as every other company in America. America. But no, not a part of the Affordable Care Act in 2010. Okay, so then the same act, by the way, this was sponsored by a Democrat from Oregon in the House, okay? The exact same law, the exact same law was sponsored by a Republican from Arizona in 2017, okay? It passed the House barely, and then it died in the Senate Judiciary Committee.

And now, when it passed the Senate in December, it was a unanimous vote. Everyone in the Senate voted in favor of health insurance companies now being subjected to antitrust regulation, every single one. So, that begs the question, why? Okay, so obviously, the health insurance industry must have done something to really tick off the congressmen and the senators and the president, okay? Why? Listen, and I'm no political strategist. I don't know why. This is just my theory that I'm going to share with you today.

So, what happened was COVID-19. That's what happened. And as everybody knows, all the elective procedures got delayed or canceled, right? And as a result of that, all the health insurance companies were still collecting all their premiums. And so, they had record profits, like record on top of record profits, because they were collecting the premium and they weren't paying out as much in claims, because people were canceling all their elective procedures, like their orthopedic spine and knees and hips, etc., etc.

Now, United Health Group, in the second quarter of 2020, made $6.7 billion of profit. That's not revenue, that's profit. That Anthem made $2.3 billion in profit. Humana made $1.8 billion in profit in just one quarter alone, the second quarter of 2020. That, for all of them, that is a 200% increase. It is double for the second quarter of 2019. So, they all basically doubled their profit compared to the previous year in just that one quarter. And so, wait a minute. So, here we have a national catastrophe where people are dying and we have healthcare workers on the front lines struggling day in and day out.

And you have health insurance companies making record profits. Now, I'm not making a judgment about that, but what I am saying is that if you're a congressman or a senator, like, it is politically untenable for you to continue to protect the health insurance industry against antitrust regulation in this environment where you have a national crisis that health insurance companies profit off of, right? Like, that is just, like, you can't do that. Let's say you voted against Shira. Let's say you voted against it.

Like, that's political suicide. Then when you went for re-election, they'd be like, look what you did, congressman or congresswoman or senator. Look what you did. There's no, and hence, unanimous. Unanimous. And that might be why you have unanimous. Now, the Justice Department sent out a press release that said, this is fantastic. We are so looking forward to taking advantage of the antitrust regulatory power that we now have. The National Law Review also said this paves the way for private litigation where individuals or companies could then sue as well because they could be justified now in doing so.

So, this is a major change. And note here, at the tumultuous political times that we're having right now, we had a major change in regards to safe harbor for rebate payments to PBMs. And we have this huge antitrust regulatory change for health insurance companies. So, this is, this is some, like, momentous stuff. And I wanted to share it with you here. And thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

