Title: High Cost Orphan Disease Drugs Explained_JQdvi6g0mog
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JQdvi6g0mog
Language: en
Duration: 13:02
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is super high cost orphan disease drugs. Now, an orphan disease is one that is rare. And so typically in America, an orphan disease is one where like less than 200,000 people have it. So like an example of an orphan disease is like cystic fibrosis. So cystic fibrosis, like many orphan diseases, it's a genetic disorder. So people are, kids are born with it, right? And it affects the lungs and the digestive system. And it basically causes the mucus to be too thick.

So it gets all clogged up. And in the lungs, it causes super bad lung infections. And in the intestines, it causes blockage of digestive enzymes. So these people get, you know, horrible pneumonias and are coughing constantly. And then they have terrible malabsorption. They have a hard time with their nutrition and gaining weight. So oftentimes they're incredibly malnourished. And so historically people with cystic fibrosis, I mean, it was a horrible life. And they only lived to be like 19, then it expanded to like 29 and then 39.

And then believe it or not, the average life expectancy for somebody with cystic fibrosis now is 47. So it's still low, but it's much longer than it used to be. Well, there has been really a revolutionary new medication for the treatment of cystic fibrosis. And it's called Trikofta. And it was only sort of FDA approved in 2019. So just a few years ago. And it's pills that people can take. And it dramatically improves their symptoms. They're coughing and their lung infections go way down. They're able to put on weight and have much better digestion.

And so the challenge is, is that this medication, the list price is $300,000. And then after the insurance, you know, PBM discount, blah, blah, blah, it's like $200,000 a year. And, and people need to take this like for their lifetime. And so literally it's indicated for, you know, it's a, it's a genetic disease. So like little babies, little kids have cystic fibrosis. And so it's actually, you can start taking it when you're two. And so if the average age of somebody is to 47, that means they got to take it for 45 years.

And at $200,000 a year, that means that a lifetime's treatment of Trikofta is $9 million. So there's 40,000 patients in America that have cystic fibrosis. And so as you can see, it is tremendously expensive, especially at like the individual employer level. So you as an employer right now, most employers, it's like, okay, well, they're just trying to cross their fingers and like luck out that they don't have somebody with cystic fibrosis. But if they do, it's going to cost them $200,000 a year for that one patient, just for that one medication, they have to take other treatments and therapy sometimes as well.

Sometimes they get hospitalized and need IV antibiotics for their pneumonia. So there can be, you know, much greater expenses for a patient with cystic fibrosis. Now, I'm not in any way diminishing the fact that how revolutionary and life changing it is for these people. Listen, I personally, when I was in residency, I had patients with cystic fibrosis. And at Compass, when we were working with employers, we had an employer that had an employee who had two children with cystic fibrosis. And I'll just tell you that the current like funding mechanism in America for employer-sponsored health plans, whether it be fully insured or like self-funded, it's completely just incompatible with a medication that costs $200,000 a year.

And so essentially, like, how did we get here? Well, the makers of Trikofta, it's a pharmaceutical company called Vertex. And almost nobody's heard of Vertex pharmaceuticals. Guess what? It's like one of the largest pharmaceutical companies in the world. It has a market capitalization. In other words, it is valued at $123 billion. To put that into context, Vertex is a more valuable company than Blackstone, that big private equity firm that everybody talks about as being this vampire squid. And they're like, look, Vertex is bigger than Blackstone.

Okay. UPS, the brown uniforms and the trucks deliver in packages. Okay. Vertex pharmaceuticals, bigger than that. Citigroup, one of the largest banks in the world. Vertex pharmaceuticals, larger than that. Okay. Vertex, almost all of their revenue comes from this one medication, Trikofta. So just in terms of the scale, okay, so here you have a revolutionary treatment for 40,000 people in America. And it has created a company that is one of the largest companies in America, just off that one medication and the revenue from it.

Now, keep in mind, people in other countries have cystic fibrosis. And believe it or not, like right now, Vertex is like in negotiations with these other countries because these other countries are like, look, we can't pay that much money. And literally there are people with cystic fibrosis in these other countries who are dying because Vertex like won't sell it to them for any cheaper. So it's a huge problem. Okay. Like I'm not here to offer any easy solutions, but like, it's just this entire area of creating these therapies that are life changing for people and then charging so much for them that it's really just out of reach, not only for people here in America, but for people across the world.

It's hugely problematic. Okay. Another example, Duchenne's muscular dystrophy. So here we actually have a gene therapy called Alevitus, where it's just one infusion that is given and it cures their DMD, their muscular dystrophy. And it costs $3.2 million for one treatment. So how is this possible? How is it that we can have a company that treats a rare disorder become one of the largest companies in America? And how can we have a treatment that costs $3.2 million for one treatment? Well, it goes back to the Affordable Care Act, because one of the changes in the Affordable Care Act was that it said that there are no longer lifetime maximums for health insurance policies.

So previously, before the ACA, there were lifetime maximums. It was typically about $1 to $2 million. So as long as you were on that insurance policy, the policy would only pay out $1 to $2 million, and it wouldn't pay out any more. And so as a result, there was this conflict because the vertexes of the world wanted to keep ratcheting up their prices. But then the people with insurance were like, well, I've exhausted my insurance benefits, so I can't pay for the medication anymore. And so what would happen sometimes is that the person would just be out of luck.

And then other times the insurance company or the pharmaceutical company would be like, okay, well, let's price our medication so that it's at least reasonable for a person to not hit their out-of-pocket or their lifetime max for that medication. And so now that there's no longer a lifetime max, and keep in mind, the pharmaceutical companies, they really pushed for the elimination of this lifetime max because they knew that the spigots were just wide open, that once the insurance policies no longer had a lifetime max, then the pharmaceutical companies could literally just charge literally whatever they want.

And the insurance company, which is really just the employer, okay? This is not about the insurance company paying. This is the employers of America paying, okay? This is like Joe's plumbing paying. This is like also like huge major corporations paying, and then all sorts of like companies in between. But this is really like, okay, how are the employers of America as a financing function for healthcare supposed to pay for things when there literally is a blank check? And that's really what today's video is about.

Okay, so what's one thing that's done for this? Well, there's something called SSDI, Social Security Disability Income, where people who have certain diseases can qualify for SSDI. And when you qualify for SSDI, you also get Medicare coverage. And kind of A number one, like the poster child for this was end-stage renal disease. So people, typically because they had diabetes, they went into kidney failure and they needed dialysis. And so they would then qualify for Medicare. And dialysis, sort of similar to Trikofta and Elevitus was hugely expensive.

And so the groups, the patient advocacy groups for people with end-stage renal disease lobbied for Medicare coverage. And they got it back in the 1970s. Okay, so you can actually get SSDI and you can get Medicare if you have cystic fibrosis, but there's a problem. And the problem is, is that you have to have lung dysfunction. You basically, your disease has to cause you to deteriorate and be hospitalized. And like, no one would, like, that's insane. Like, you would never want somebody with cystic fibrosis to like get worse, just so that they can qualify Medicare so that they can pay for their medications.

I mean, we're talking about children here. You would never want a child to intentionally get worse, just so that they could qualify for Medicare. That's ridiculous. Okay, so like the current strategy for getting people on to Medicare for things like cystic fibrosis, it's like not ideal, like it's really not a good situation. Okay, so fine. So what are some practical things that a self-funded employer can do? Okay, one is you better believe that you want to be a part of an insurance captive if you're self-funded, because that way your stop loss insurance can't laser you.

So a lot of these insurance captives, they have like a no laser policy. Whereas if you just go out and buy self, buy reinsurance on your own, like you get somebody who's on TriKofta, then they're just going to laser that person, which means you as the employer, you're going to be responsible for that 200 grand. And you're not going to, you're not going to be covered with your stop loss insurance for the TriKofta. But if you're part of a captive, well, then you're not going to be, you're not going to get lasered if you end up with somebody with cystic fibrosis, cystic fibrosis and TriKofta on your plan.

So that's one strategy. Number two is, is look, as a self-funded plan, you can just elect for non-coverage, like to a certain extent, like it is, it might be like the choice between like keeping your business open and being able to cover these medications. And so like literally you might, your hands might be tied, like, especially if you're like a, you know, you could be 200, 300, 500 employees and be self-funded. And like, you might not have a choice. It's not great for the individual. In fact, it's horrible for the individual, but it also like, but that individual's insurance is going to be gone if you go out of business.

So for some employers, like they literally, their hands are tied, like it's a horrible choice, but their hands are tied. There's literally nothing else that they can do. Okay. Now, and then when they, when they do that, sometimes they have these alternative funding programs, but, but you know, again, there's a whole, that's a whole nother video for another day in terms of getting on the patient assistance programs. Like many patient assistance programs specifically say now that, look, if your employer is using an alternative funding program, then you will not qualify for the patient assistance program.

Like we're not going to be able to give you reduced cost TriKofta if you use an alternative funding program. So like I said, that's another video for another day, but even that's not a great answer. Ultimately, the employers of America, they need to lobby for these orphan diseases to automatically get covered by Medicare. They need to be treated the exact same way that end stage renal disease does the exact same way that people with dialysis was. There is no reason that people with dialysis get to be on Medicare, but people with cystic fibrosis do not.

If anything, it's discrimination against people with cystic fibrosis. Of course, they should be able to get Medicare. It's un-American for them not to be able to get Medicare. And then you say, okay, well, the, you know, Medicare is going bankrupt and the trust fund is going to run out. Listen, at the end of the day, the government has two things that employers and states don't have. Okay. What can the, what can the federal government do? The federal government can issue unlimited quantities of debt. So at the end of the day, the federal government can literally create money out of thin air to pay for this stuff.

The states can't do this. Businesses can't do that. And then two, the federal government can actually negotiate. In other words, do price controls and price setting with pharmaceuticals. And so what, what really needs to happen is, is that people with cystic fibrosis need to be on Medicare. And then CMS and the government need to go to Vertex and be like, look, we got to sit down because 200 grand a month, or excuse me, 200 grand a year, 9 million for these people, like isn't going to work. So like that's going to take probably, you know, years to play out, but at least we can get started in that direction.

So that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

