Title: High Healthcare Costs in Dallas-Fort Worth Spur Healthcare Innovation_uQz6gNdhEJI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uQz6gNdhEJI
Language: en
Duration: 10:18
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is high cost metro area and healthcare innovation. That's right, right here in Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas, we have incredibly high healthcare costs. And, it's no coincidence that Dallas-Fort Worth also happens to be an area where there is a tremendous amount of healthcare delivery innovation. So, we're going to go over that coincidence today. So, now, there was a very interesting article from just before COVID from the Dallas Morning News from February of 2019, so I guess a year before COVID.

And, it showed that the per capita healthcare costs in the Dallas-Fort Worth area were $6,126 per person per year. Okay, well how does that stand compared to other major metro areas in America? Let's first look at the state of Texas. Okay, so down in Houston, it's $5,813. It's less. In Austin, it's $4,946. It's a lot less. Okay, fine. Austin's kind of a smaller city. Let's look at other big cities. The biggest of them all. The Big Apple. New York City. $6,056. What? Less. Listen. New York, in general, is much more expensive than Dallas-Fort Worth.

In fact, it's one of the reasons that so many people move to Dallas-Fort Worth. It's because it's so affordable around here. And, look at that. Health care in Dallas-Fort Worth is more expensive than New York City. Holy moly. Chicago. I lived in Chicago for 10 years. I love Chicago. Their per capita health care costs per year are $5,033. Shoot, that's a lot less than Dallas-Fort Worth. Miami. Demographically, we might guess that people in Miami might tend to be older. $5,298. Atlanta. $4,986. In a lot of ways, I think of Atlanta and Dallas as being very similar in terms of just being, you know, southern cities that are having super rapid growth.

Same thing with Houston. So, look at this. In Atlanta, way less expensive than in Dallas-Fort Worth. Aha. So, if there's a place to innovate around being more cost effective in health care, then Dallas is a great place to do it. Aha. It is no coincidence that there are major forces in health care innovation that have already come to the Dallas-Fort Worth area. And, we're going to go over them right now. One, when we think about health care innovation, of course, we have to think about Amazon. Now, I'm not talking about Amazon care, but instead I'm talking about Amazon's near-site clinics for their own employees.

And, as you can imagine, Amazon has a massive, massive distribution center by the DFW airport. And, Dallas-Fort Worth area is so big that they also have a lot of other distribution centers around it. So, they have gobs and gobs of Amazon employees in Dallas-Fort Worth. So, they have created, through the partnership with a near-site clinic company, they've created six near-site clinics in Dallas-Fort Worth. Why is that so important? Amazon could have picked any metropolitan area in America to start this. And, they chose Dallas-Fort Worth.

Isn't that interesting? Is that just a coincidence that Dallas just happens to have higher health care costs than all these other cities that I've just mentioned? And, then Amazon, which just happens to use a lot of data and make very analytical decisions, just happens to choose Dallas as where they do their near-site clinics? It could just be a coincidence. I don't know. But, that's where they started it. Okay. Now, here's the most interesting thing about these clinics. They are open Monday through Saturday, 7 a.m.

to 11 p.m. What does that tell you? The A number one thing that they are achieving with these clinics is access, access, and access. It's six days a week, not five. And, it's earlier in the morning, 7 a.m. until late at night, 11 p.m. Access, access, and access. So, if they're identifying a pain point that they are addressing to lower health care costs in DFW, the A number one way they are addressing it is through access. Now, these inter-site clinics are providing primary care. They also are providing telemedicine.

Aha! Also, access. They're also doing behavioral health as well because, of course, the biopsychosocial model of disease says that, look, we're not just diabetes or hypertension, that everything is related to how we think and our emotions. And, if we have an underlying, let's say, depression or anxiety, that totally influences our health. So, you have to address behavioral health as well. Musculoskeletal orthopedic services are hugely expensive. So, if you do things that are less invasive from a musculoskeletal perspective, they're going to do that in the clinics.

And, also, coaching around nutrition and lifestyle choices. Okay. Next up, Blue Cross Puscia, Texas, which is the 800-pound gorilla, of course, in insurance in Texas. They are also starting near-site clinics. And, guess who's, now they are not literally starting their own clinics. They're vendoring it out to a vendor. Guess who they're vendoring it out to? A company called Sunitas. Where is Sunitas based out of? Columbia. As in Columbia, South America. That's right. Blue Cross Puscia of Texas is using a clinic company that's based in Columbia.

They run a whole bunch of clinics and healthcare facilities in Columbia. And, they're using up here. So, look at this. We've got Colombians helping to solve our healthcare problems here in the Dallas-Fort Worth area and in Texas. Nothing wrong with that. I think the Colombian people are wonderful. But, I'm just saying, look, we've got to go to other countries to bring in expertise around how to lower our healthcare costs. Now, in Dallas-Fort Worth, they've got four clinics. And, in Houston, they've got six. So, they're just getting started.

I see billboards next to our highway that says sign up for Blue Cross Puscia of Texas and have zero copay primary care visits. They're providing primary care for free for certain plan members on Blue Cross. Guess what they're also doing besides primary care at these clinics? Telemedicine. There's a shocker. Increased access. Again, also notice, they're not providing specialty care. It's all primary care. Next up. UnitedHealthcare. The 800-pound gorilla of healthcare nationally. And, of course, Optum, which is essentially 50% of UnitedHealth Group.

And, they are actually delivering healthcare services. They actually employ physicians. And, they actually own healthcare facilities. Now, in Southern California, where this got started, they call it the Harmony Network. They have over 6,500 doctors in Southern California between LA and Orange County that they employ. Like, literally, they're white coats. Some of them say, like, Optum on them. So, you're like, well, who's your doctor? I got an Optum doctor. You mean to tell me the insurance company is also your doctor? Yes, that's what they're doing.

Fine. They've been doing it in Southern California. What is the very next place they're going to? Again, coincidentally, it's Texas. That is the next place they're going to. Now, they've specifically made moves by buying into a company called WellMed, which owns sort of smaller hospitals in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, just a handful of them, that are called USMD. They've already made purchases in Texas to own clinical resources. Okay, next up, we've got CVS-Aetna. Health hubs. You've seen this a gazillion times, right? You know that they've changed those minute clinics into primary care clinics within those CVS locations.

Now, what places did they choose? Dallas-Fort Worth. Again, is it just a coincidence? They put in 40 of them here. Now, they could have chosen any other cities in America. What cities did they choose? They chose Boston, they chose the Washington, D.C. area, they chose North Carolina, and they chose Ohio, and they chose DFW. So, again, I don't think CVS-Aetna made this choice willy-nilly. They probably said, look, the health care costs in Texas are pretty high, and in DFW, they're pretty high. Might be a good place to do our health hub innovation.

Now, will this whole movement here of the organizations that take clinical risk, in this case, the employer takes the clinical risk, Blue Cross, United, CVS-Aetna, in situations where they're fully insured or for their Medicare Advantage folks. Like, they're taking clinical risk for the patients. And they said, huh, if we're going to take on clinical risk, then we're going to actually provide care. And sort of the newer term for that is a pay-vider, right? It's the cross between a payer, like an insurance company or an employer, and a provider, like a hospital or a physician practice.

So, these pay-viders are where the people who are taking on the clinical risk or the organizations that are taking on the clinical risk have said, hey, you know what we're going to do? We're going to get into the provision of care business. Now, I'm not saying this is necessarily going to work. I'm just saying this is the direction things are moving in. Now, what's interesting is that we do not have the opposite here in Dallas-Fort Worth. We do not have the major hospital systems that provide care. We don't have them taking on the risk in terms of starting insurance companies.

Now, other hospital systems have started insurance companies. Intermountain Health is started an insurance company. University of Pittsburgh is started an insurance company. University of Utah is started an insurance company. Geisinger is started an insurance company. So, like other hospitals in other parts of the country, and some of these insurance companies have been around for a long time. They're not new. The UPMC insurance company is not new. The Intermountain Health insurance company called Select Health, they're not new.

So, listen, it remains to be seen. Maybe these hospitals in Dallas-Fort Worth will start their own insurance companies. I don't know. But I can tell you that the organizations that take on clinical risk in Dallas-Fort Worth are getting in the provider business. And that's the point that I wanted to make today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

