Title: History of Healthcare Costs_ 30 Years in 7 Minutes_BihEVon9Dr0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BihEVon9Dr0
Language: en
Duration: 7:19
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing the history of employer sponsored healthcare costs. And so this literally might be the most boring topic ever. So I have gone like no time, like sleeves rolled up. I mean you should see the fashion advice that I received from you people. So I'm pulling out all the stops today. And so what we're going to do is we're going to go through this chart in detail. And what this is, is healthcare inflation over time from about 1993.

through 2018. And you can see that it was incredibly low in the early and mid nineties. And then it became very high in the late nineties and early two thousands. And then it has then come down to sort of a medium amount since then through like let's say 2007, 2008 through 2018. Okay. So I'm going to basically break this up into three phases. Phase one, phase two, and phase three. Now we're going to look at these, this healthcare cost history through the lens of employer levers that then are able to pull. And they basically come down to three things.

The premium. In other words, what your overall healthcare costs are, right? You can really dial down the cost or you can let the costs flow. So the amount that's paid out in place. Then the payout, in other words, you know, how much the plan actually covers, like in terms of like out of pocket costs versus what the plan is going to cover. So in other words, what's the payout to the employees? What's the deductible? What's the copay? What's the current? What's the out of pocket next? And then lastly is the print.

The rules, right? The rules of what is covered when and how, and I was actually described this for disability insurance, but it actually applies to all insurance policies, right? And the point is, is that in insurance, you can only pick two out of the three being good. And then one of them by definition has to be bad. Okay. And so that's why we're going to talk about how each one of the three phases involve these three P's. All right. So phase one was the phase of HMOs and managed care. And look, there's a fantastic health affairs article.

This article was from 1996. I'm going to go ahead and actually read this here because it says the central message here is that managed care plans have succeeded in their primary mission to reduce the growth and rate of healthcare costs. Guess what? HMOs worked. They absolutely lowered healthcare costs. And you can see here in phase one, look how low the healthcare cost inflation was. It was essentially flat. Okay. So you had really good premiums. You had very low deductibles and copays. Like sometimes the deductible zero, the copays were like $5, but the fine print was really bad.

There were tons of rules. You had a gatekeeper PCP. They controlled your referrals a hundred percent. You had to do what they told you to do or you essentially didn't have insurance at all. So they're very strict rules. So in this case, good premium, good payout, bad rules. Okay. Then we move on to phase two. Phase two was right here. Very high costs. Phase two was PPO plus obesity. So in the nineties, if you all can remember, there was a huge backlash of the patient's bill of rights. People did not like all those rules.

And so you can see, this is over time that the percentage of people in PPO plans went down while the people in PPO plans went up. Okay, fine. So you still had a copay $25, $5. You had a low deductible. It was zero, a hundred, $200, but they essentially got rid of the rules. So you didn't have to have a PCP gatekeeper anymore. You could self-refer to wherever you wanted. And so, oh, and by the way, that's when the obesity epidemic kicked in. So what happened was, was that another article from health affairs from 2005 looked at healthcare costs back in like the early two thousands, late nineties.

And it said, look, previous work has indicated that the rise in modifiable risk factors, such as obesity, accounted for approximately 27%. And the change of healthcare spending between 1987 and 2002. So this is when the obesity epidemic kicked in. So you had no rules. You had low out of pocket costs and you had obesity going through the roof. Upwards of 30 to 35 to 40%. Now it started in 1980, but as you can imagine, the long-term effects of obesity took about 10 to 15 years to really kick in. You didn't start getting sick with hypertension, high cholesterol, heart disease, back pain, diabetes in year one.

It took several years, a decade, a decade and a half of that obesity to essentially result in that. So phase two was good payout. In other words, you had deductible, low, very low deductibles, very low copays. You had very good fine print. You didn't get self-refer. You didn't have any PCP gatekeeper rules, but you had bad premium. Healthcare costs were super high. Okay. Next up, we're moving into phase three. Phase three is the phase of the HDHP, high co-insurance, high out-of-pocket max. So it's in other words, it's the great cost shift.

Okay. And you can see here what this is, is this is deductible spending over time. This is co-insurance spending over time. This is out-of-pocket max spending over time. And what is this inflection point right here? 2009. So look at that from 2009 to 2018. So essentially for the last nine, 10 years, we've had this traumatic cost shift that has resulted in these relatively low, relatively low healthcare cost inflation, right? So we say, oh, healthcare costs are going up, but they're still relatively low compared to where they were in the past.

So phase three is characterized by good, fairly good premiums, like fairly good high, you know, fairly good print. So you don't have a lot of rules, but bad payout, bad coverage, right? The deductibles are not good. The contra is not good. The out-pocket max is not good. Okay. So what are the lessons of healthcare cost history? One, there are three traditional employer level levers. Okay. We have already cycled through the bad print lever of the HMOs, the bad premium lever of the loaded up for PPO plan and the bad payout lever of the HDHP.

So can you have all three levers be good? And the answer is no, probably not. However, what I think, and so just as you can imagine, there is no quote unquote silver bullet, right? Everyone's looking for the easiest solution as like one thing, but life is complicated. And so what it really calls for is a Goldilocks approach, not too hot, not too cold, just right. And what I mean is not too hot, not too cold, just right. As it relates to the print, the premium and the payout. In other words, you have to kind of, you can't overshoot any one of those three.

You have to kind of tweak all three. And that's exactly what navigation, onsite clinics, direct contracting, reference-based pricing, second opinion, programs with centers of excellence. All of those different levers need to be tweaked by group. And I was talking with a benefits consultant earlier this week. And that's why essentially the broker benefit consultant and the head of benefits in HR, you're essentially like the doctors for the plan. And you have to diagnose the plan and you have to tailor a specific treatment or a Goldilocks approach for your specific group.

Because just because it works for group A with a highly concentrated group of employees at a municipality, doesn't mean that a group works with group B with a highly distributed sales force from coast to coast. And so those are the lessons of history that we can learn. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

