Title: Home IV Infusions Take 59 Steps - US Healthcare Gone Wrong_iJQBSdPQi8U
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iJQBSdPQi8U
Language: en
Duration: 6:06
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Home Infusions Fee-for-Service Gone Bad. Now this is just a tiny little niche within the huge over three trillion dollar healthcare market but it's a super important niche because it's illustrative of one of the huge problems with fee-for-service. So home infusions are used to give people antibiotics, chemotherapy, fluid, even nutrition through an IV at home. Now I had to draw a little diagram up here. I hope you can understand it.

So here we have the chin, the neck, and then we have what's called a PICC line which is a peripherally inserted central catheter. Okay so it goes like this part of the arm and it's snaked through the subclavian vein to what's referred to as a superior vena cable right at the entrance of the heart and then it's stitched in. So basically it's like an IV that you can take home because it's not going to come out right and then it has a port after about oh several inches of tubing that you have to wrap around your arm and then at home you would connect that to an IV bag or an IV ball to give yourself the antibiotics or the chemo or the fluids or whatever it is.

Okay so that's what we're talking about when we're talking about home infusions. Now believe it or not 60,000 people a day are undergoing home infusions at any point in time in America. Okay it is an 8.4 billion dollar a year industry. There's even an entire academic journal dedicated to home infusions. And so healthcare is so big that even this little itsy bitsy niche is still a significant multi-billion dollar a year business. Now here's the problem. The readmission rate for patients that are sent home from the hospital with a PICC line needing to have more antibiotics, chemo, whatever is 21 percent.

It's one in five. We used to send people home from the hospital all the time with PICC lines for home infusion etc etc. Like I don't think once was it ever told to the patient oh by the way there's a one in five chance you're going to have to be readmitted. I mean that is a risk that should be informed to every single patient being discharged with a PICC line and it didn't happen. Now what would happen is is that in if you have commercial insurance you get insurance through your job and you get readmitted to the hospital guess who pays? The employer pays.

And if you have not reached your out-of-pocket maxi, guess what? You're gonna pay and it's probably gonna be like several thousand dollars that you're gonna have to pay. So like if they were to say to you oh by the way there's a one in five chance that you might have to pay probably two to three thousand bucks in the next month. You'd be like whoa whoa whoa what's the plan here? We need to have a very concrete plan for this because I probably don't have an extra two to three grand to pay for a readmission.

And this gets us to home health. Who administers these home infusions is home health. But here's the trick. The home health agency that's either owned by the hospital system or contracts with the hospital system. They have nurses. They come out to the house. The nurse does not administer the home infusion. They teach the patient or the family member to infuse themselves. Okay. They have awesome videos about this. I'll leave a link in the show notes to one for Sutter Health Care out on the west coast. It's one of the largest health care systems in America.

It is a 10 minute video by a nurse. It's a fantastic video. It's really good. Guess how many steps it takes to do one home infusion. It takes 59 steps. How do I know? Because I watched the video and I counted every single step. Okay. That's a lot of steps. For most people in America if you can remember VCRs we can't even program VCRs. How in the world are we going to be able to successfully execute 59 steps? Now keep in mind a lot of these home infusions have to be done three times a day. So you're talking upwards of 180 steps a day that need to be executed.

I'll leave another link in the show notes for a video of a gentleman who's actually giving himself a home infusion. And guess what he says? He's like, you know I'm supposed to wash my hands before I do this and I'll do this for the YouTube video but I'm probably not going to wash my hands every time. Guess what? That's a source of infection for you've got this thing going into your heart. If it's not clean you can literally inject bacteria into your heart. And guess what? 19% of PICC lines have complications.

What's one of the major form of complications for PICC lines? It's infection or it gets blocked with a blood clot or it gets pulled out. And guess what happens when that PICC line gets pulled out? You bleed. You bleed from where it came out. And I'm only laughing because it's so ridiculous and it's such a tenuous plan. I mean it's essentially like a rope bridge to recovery. And if you build a rope bridge over a ravine, guess what? Some people are probably going to fall, right? It probably requires a certain degree of skill to get across that rope bridge.

And yes, there are absolutely people that have the skill that are capable of administering home infusions. But it's not a huge suspension bridge. Like people are going to fall and who pays for it in the fee for service system is the employer and the patient. So if this is a perfect example because believe me, would this process change if the hospital was on the hook? If the doctor was on the hook? Of course this process would change. So here's an example of fee for service creating a rope bridge that frankly is dangerous for people.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

