Title: Hospitals Will Innovate to Keep Nurses_ 66_ Thinking of Leaving_fZUygr5WDEk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fZUygr5WDEk
Language: en
Duration: 9:23
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is hospital innovation will happen. That's right. I am going out on a limb today and I'm going to predict the future. Okay. And I'm telling you that hospital innovation absolutely will happen. The new center of innovation in healthcare will be hospital systems. And I'm going to tell you why, because they have to, they have no other choice. Let me explain that. So apparently, and I'm sure many of you have seen this over many different news stories, 18% of healthcare workers have left their jobs since February of 2020.

And on top of that, 12% of healthcare workers have been laid off. So they're either being asked to leave or they are choosing to leave. Healthcare workers are voting with their feet. Next point. 31% of healthcare workers, in other words, the people that are still working, not the people that have left, have considered leaving a third. And in the most critical settings in the ICU and in acute care nursing, 66% of ICU nurses and acute care nurses have considered leaving. They're thinking about leaving. Now, we have more statistics to go over.

In an article in the Atlantic, it describes how an ICU because of all of the people leaving, all of the nurses leaving, all the healthcare workers leaving. They now have a four to one rate patient to nurse ratio in the ICU. Believe me, I have spent a lot of time working in the ICU alongside of nurses and respiratory therapists. I mean, it is an incredibly complex environment filled with people working incredibly hard with incredibly high levels of intelligence. Everybody on the team like that. And I will tell you that you cannot take care of four critically ill people with one nurse.

You cannot do that. If you have two critically ill people in two rooms side by side, like typically one nurse can't even do two. Okay. Not because the nurse is incapable, because it's literally, I mean, if you have somebody who is like crashing and, or anyway, I won't get into detail. Seriously, you know, crazy ill, you know, whether it be a GI bleeder or these people who are, um, you know, dying of liver disease. I mean, you know, people that have to be on an awesome, used to use oscillator vents at Hopkins because they had such bad ARDS.

So listen, that requires super intense nursing, not four to one nursing. Nobody watching this video would want to have a family member in an ICU where the nurse to patient ratio, where the patient nurse ratio is four to one. You do not want that. Okay. Next up. So they've all left. They shouldn't sit in. Many of them have left. What are the ramifications of that? You have to still staff the hospital. You have to still staff the hospital. A Florida hospital in a typical year prior to COVID would spend a million dollars a year on temporary workers.

Sometimes they call them traveling nurses, other people, other types of traveling, uh, healthcare workers as well. Okay. This past year, they spent 24 million. They spent 24 times as much in order to maintain the staffing at their hospital because so many people have left. Now, the gist, uh, newsletter, which I will leave a link to in the show notes makes an excellent point this previous week where they said, look, the, and this was according to the COO of a major hospital that the gist folks were working in.

And they were saying, look, the average age of a nurse is 52 and 19% of nurses are over the age of 65. What does that mean? There's no inflow of new nurses. People don't want to go into nursing. If the average age is that high and that many folks are over the age of 65, then obviously there's not enough newer, younger people going into the profession. Why is that? Because reactive acute hospital care is a super hard job. I'm not criticizing these nurses or these healthcare workers at all. It is a ridiculously hard job.

Here's my point. It's too hard. It is unreasonable to expect people to do this job for prolonged period of times. It's not humanly possible. It's, I'm sorry. It's not. And part of the problem is, is that even the people within the profession think, I mean, they literally have to sacrifice everything. They sacrifice their health, they sacrifice their family, they sacrifice their happiness. I mean, they have nothing left because they have given it all to people who are hospitalized. And that is unsustainable. So workers are voting with their feet.

They're voting with their feet. They're like, enough. I don't blame them at all. I think it's the right thing to do. Now, the other problem is, is that it's not just these tenured nurses who know what they're doing. It's such a complex service that these people are not commodities. If you have an incredibly experienced nurse who leaves, that is a huge loss to the functioning of the floor of the hospital. Now, it's incredibly stressful. Listen, when a patient is acutely ill, the patient's stressed out, okay, their families are stressed out.

And the interpersonal communication between hospital staff and patients and family members is incredibly challenging, okay, incredibly challenging, and oftentimes, unpleasant way, okay. It is, but, and you wouldn't expect it to be pleasant. I mean, if I was incredibly ill, or if I had a family member who's incredibly ill, like, I wouldn't be pleasant either. Like, that's totally normal. I'm not blaming the patients for that. It's just a reality of the situation. But guess what? It's super hard to deal with. Now, when you are super busy at the hospital, you do not eat, okay? And, you know, you don't, okay? Like, you're like, oh, you know, I'll get to it.

I'll grab a thing. Like, it's awful. And then the stuff that you do eat is terrible, okay? You don't drink. Like, you'll go, like, literally a 12-hour shift and be like, I drank nothing. And so what happens is, you don't go to the bathroom. You'll be like, oh, I haven't gone to the bathroom in, like, a day. Like, that literally happens. And then you add on top of it, being in a mask and PPE is incredibly uncomfortable. Like, it is an incredibly uncomfortable setup to be in for a prolonged period of time. So you put in the physical demands, you put in the emotional demands, you put in the intellectual demands, and I would argue, like, it is an inhumanly too hard job.

It's just too much. Now, this is, and this is, this will be solved. I'm not painting doom and gloom. I'm actually incredibly optimistic because, listen, when the going gets tough, the tough get going. And we here in America are not quit. We're not quitters here in America. We have a state of existential innovation. We are going to innovate because we have to, and we are going to, and we already have. Interestingly, a video that I posted last week about the Ochsner Healthcare System in New Orleans and about how they moved towards greater care, taking care of patients proactively in their homes and in their communities and doing more outpatient-focused primary care services as opposed to reactive acute hospitalization was a huge win for them, not only financially, but in terms of patient care.

Guess what they did? They innovated. They were a hospital that innovated. So listen, hospitals will innovate. There will be other hospitals that will look at Ochsner and be like, aha, we got to do what they did, and they will do that. As they should. It's a smart idea. Now, guess what Ochsner did? They bought a hospital system right next door to them, the Rush Hospital System. They expanded into Mississippi and Alabama. Guess what? It's a seven hospital system that Ochsner expanded into. Guess when they did this? June of 2021 is when they announced it, right in the middle of the COVID pandemic.

So here you have a hospital who through innovation is actually growing and they're not growing because they just want to grow reactive acute hospital care. They're growing because they have innovated in a way that is sustainable. So believe me, healthcare innovation will happen on the hospital side. I'm super excited about it. We're seeing just the beginning of it and it's going to snowball and it's going to snowball because the workers within healthcare will no longer tolerate the status quo. And that's my point for today.

Thank you for watching..

