Title: Hospital Price Transparency Website TryBilly.App__eNPP591hkU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNPP591hkU
Language: en
Duration: 15:13
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is a review of the Billy Hospital Price Transparency website. So it's going to be a little different because I'm actually going to walk you through this Billy website. Now I have no affiliation with Billy, but I think it's great to be able to see prices, which is why I want to share with you. So hold on while we switch over to the Billy site so you can actually see it. Okay, so here you go. You go to trybilly.app and you can actually try it out.

You can try it for free. And then after a certain number of tries, then you can pay for a subscription. So I went ahead and I paid for my subscription and you can see that it's a, you can use it on your computer or you can use it on your phone and it gives you literally maps with comparative pricing. Now to make things easy, I've just gone ahead and loaded this. The first screen that you get to when you look up prices, it's going to ask you for a CPT code or a DRG code. CPT codes are five digits. They're used for outpatient services.

DRG codes are used. They can be three digits and they are used for inpatient codes. Now you'll need to know the CPT code or the DRG code in advance. So you either need to ask the doctor's office or you'll need to Google it. So you'll need to do some research before using Billy. Then you'll need to have the zip code that you want to look up the area for. The third thing that you'll need is your insurance card because you're going to need the name of your insurance network. So then we're going to click on go. And this is for Dallas is the area that we looked up and this is for a trans thoracic echocardiogram, which is just an ultrasound of the heart.

And so you can see all these prices here and we're going to zoom in to the different locations. Now you can see here that you have a bunch of dots without prices and then you have prices. So the dots without prices are healthcare facilities that don't have data for echocardiograms, typically because they just don't do echocardiograms there. It could be like a dermatologist office, right? There's not going to be echocardiogram for a dermatologist, right? So what we're going to do though is we're going to zoom in on a price.

And if you click on it, it then gives you, okay, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital. Now, because most of the people who watch a healthcare Z are involved in employer sponsored plans. We don't want, it gives you the cash price. Fine. It gives you the lowest insured. It gives you the average insured. It gives you the highest insured. But what you want to know is specifically what is the price for Blue Cross United Cigna Aetna, specifically for what your insurance is. And these prices, they're the allowed amounts. They're not billed charges.

These are after the network discounts have been applied. Now, what's going on behind the scenes here is this is where hospitals have been required to post their allowed amounts. Now, not all hospitals in America are compliant. So the data on Billy doesn't cover everything because the hospitals have not fully published all the prices that they should. Now, some of those hospitals have been warned. Some of those hospitals have been fined. But just know that if you look something up and it's not there, it may be because the hospital has just not posted it.

Again, by choice, they are intentionally not posting a price that they are actually required by law to post. Okay. So you can see here, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital. And then you can see here, you have a bunch of different networks here. So this is, and you can see that for Blue Cross, there's BCBS, there's multiple Blue Cross networks. And then you can see for, for there's a UHC network. And there, you can see there's a UHC all payer network. There's a UHC options PPO network. Likewise, there's multiple networks for Aetna.

There's multiple networks for Cigna. There's also networks outside of Blue Cross United, Aetna, and Cigna. And then you can see their associated prices over here. And they're listed from the lowest price to the highest price. Now, so the reason you need your insurance card is you need to then match up the network that's on your insurance with one of the network names over on the left. Now, oftentimes the name of the network on your card and the name over here on the left are not going to exactly match up. So frankly, you're just going to have to make an educated guess as to which network from your card matches up to which network here on the left.

Now, so that's fine. Let's just say here that we want to look at, we've got the UHC options PPO network, and that's at $985 as the allowed amount for this transthoracic ultrasound. Whereas the Blue Cross Blue Shield PPO network is at $369, so much less. It's like a third of what the UHC amount is. So I pulled the allowed amounts for what appeared to be the most common PPO networks for Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna, and we're going to go over those on another slide. So fine, that's Presbyterian. Let's now switch to one of the other major hospitals in Dallas, which is the Baylor Hospital System.

So I found the easiest thing to do is to click the back button and then click go again to get to the map. So here you are, you're back to the map where we were before. Now, you zoom in again to where you're looking for. And so here I know that this is the location of the Baylor University Medical Center. And again, you can see the cash price, the low, the average, and the highest insured price. But we want to, again, look at the details for the specific network. So you can see here that they label the networks here at Baylor differently.

Okay, so there is no common names for networks. It's essentially up to each hospital's discretion for how they describe the network. So here Baylor just calls it the United Network. And you can see that the in-network allowed amount for United is much higher. It's $2,248. You can also see the Blue Cross PPO is even more. It's $3,171. And then you can see there's an Aetna and there's a Cigna as well. So now what I've done is I've, just for the sake of being able to see easier, I have created a slide where I pulled those prices off the website and I put them into a grid.

And I will tell you that if you are wanting to do this exercise, I would highly encourage you to get a pen and paper or to get an Excel spreadsheet and just manually pull the prices and put them on a grid. So let me now show you. One, I want to show you what an echocardiogram is, right? So here is an ultra, it's an ultrasound of the heart. And I showed this heart upside down because it's actually an upside down image of the heart because it's going through sort of the skin right underneath the rib cage.

And there you have the left ventricle and the left atrium and the right atrium and the right ventricle. The apex is the tip of the heart there. There you have the intraatrial septum. There you have the intraventricular septum. There you have the tricuspid valve in between the right atrium and the right ventricle. And there you have the mitral valve between the left atrium and the left ventricle. Okay. So there you go. There's a short anatomy lesson here. So it's very common for people when they see a cardiologist for that cardiologist to then order an echocardiogram, a transthoracic echocardiogram.

Now we're going to go on to the next slide. So these are now the in-network allowed amount prices and the cash prices at Presbyterian Dallas and Baylor Dallas. So you can see here that at Presbyterian, the cash price is $1,665. The Blue Cross price is much lower at $369. The UHC price is higher at $985. The Aetna price is still higher at $1,497. And the Cigna price is the highest at $1,975. Now for comparison's sake, let's now go to Baylor Dallas. You can see the cash price for Baylor is much higher. It's $2,466. Look at the Blue Cross price here, $3,171.

Look at that. At Baylor, it's almost 10 times more than at Presbyterian. Look at this. For United, at Baylor, it's more than twice as much for UHC than at Presbyterian. For Aetna, Baylor is $1,000 more than it is at Presbyterian. And for Cigna, again, it is about $1,500 more at Baylor than it is at Presbyterian. So overall, how would a consumer use this? If you use this at the time of choosing the specialist, you say to yourself, okay, if I'm going to a specialist, I'm probably going to have a test. And I can't guarantee that you're going to have an echocardiogram, but there's a good chance that you're going to have an echocardiogram because it's a common test that cardiologists charge.

The cardiologists that practice at Baylor are typically different than the cardiologists that practice at Presbyterian. So when you're choosing a cardiologist, then it might behoove you to choose a cardiologist at Presbyterian in terms of being cost conscious because you know that when you get the echocardiogram there, it's going to be much less expensive than if you went to a Baylor cardiologist and had your echocardiogram done at Baylor. Now, this holds true for all the insurance points, regardless of which insurance you have, Baylor is going to be more expensive than Presbyterian.

Now, note though that Blue Cross has the best rate among all the insurance carriers at Presbyterian. However, Blue Cross does not have the best rate among all the insurance carriers at Baylor. In fact, the best rate among all the insurance networks at Baylor is actually United at $2,248. Aetna is the second best. Blue Cross is only the third best. And then Cigna comes in last. Now, note, the cash price at Baylor is $2,466. Note, that's less than the Blue Cross allowed amount. So one might ask, if you actually decide, hey, I want to go to a Baylor cardiologist, it might behoove you to not even use your insurance at Baylor because the cash price at Baylor is less than the Blue Cross amount at Baylor.

So I could go on and on, but for the sake of brevity, I won't. Who can use this? Okay, one, I think employer coalitions like the Dallas-Fort Worth Business Group on Health, like the Purchasers Business Group on Health, like the St. Louis Business Health Coalition, like the Houston Business Health Coalition. I think all the members and the boards of directors of all these employer business health coalitions, it's great to look at this because you can do some research and find some very interesting information about the discounts in your area.

Okay, essentially, you can, you know, people always say, I would love to be able to do a discount analysis across carriers to a certain extent by CPT code. You can actually do that discount analysis. Who else would want to use this? Hospital contract negotiators would want to use this because they would want to be like comparing. Again, let me show you here. So if you're the Presbyterian person and you're like, hey, Blue Cross, you're only giving me $369. Maybe I should get more. Like you're giving Baylor almost 10 times as much, right? So they would want to use it.

Likewise, the insurance negotiation folks as well would be like, look, Baylor, you're asking for $3,100 here. You would want to know that Baylor is giving a better deal to United. So if you're a Blue Cross rep, you're going to be like, look, if you're a Blue Cross negotiator, you're like, look, you're saying $3,100 for us? Like, why don't you give us the $2,200 deal that you're giving to UHC? So both hospital negotiators and insurance carriers would benefit from using Billy if they don't already have access to this information.

Individual self-funded employers, when you are going out to RFP your carrier or if you are having a meeting with your carrier rep, it might be helpful to look up this kind of information in advance and talk through with your carrier rep why these differences exist and have them explain to you why these differences exist and why you as an employer are paying so much more at a hospital like Baylor versus a hospital like Presbyterian for a transthoracic echocardiogram. I would argue even policy makers could use Billy.

I would also say that regulators could even use Billy so you can see where there's actually holes in the data where the hospitals haven't posted the prices. Now, individual consumers can use Billy. Health insurance brokers could use Billy. I think that if you wanted to look up the pricing for various services in the market where you have employer clients, I think it would be very helpful for you as a broker. It would make you much more knowledgeable when you're talking about pricing, not only with your clients, but also with your carrier reps as well.

Lastly, I think if a consumer was to use Billy, you've got to be a pretty astute customer, right? Because you've got to be able to look up the CPT code or the DRG code on Google or from the doctor's office. And you've got to make sure that you do a pretty good job of approximating the network that's on the insurance card with the network that's on the website. But other than that, I think that Billy does a tremendous job of revealing prices. And I just wanted to share it with you today. Thank you so much for watching A Healthcare to See.

Thank you..

