Title: Hospital Boards of Directors... 75_ Have Never Treated a Patient_3-Em_kEmgGY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kEmgGY
Language: en
Duration: 4:22
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Doctors, do you know what percentage of hospital boards are actually comprised of doctors? What about hospital CEOs? The answers might surprise you. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and I'm also a healthcare finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially, and that's why I've partnered with KnowMeHealth to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. Did you know only 20% of hospital board seats are filled by practicing or retired doctors, and that an additional 5% are filled by nurses? In other words, 75% of hospital board seats are filled by non-clinicians who have never treated a patient.

Ever! And just over the past year, of the 24 new CEO appointees at the nation's largest hospital systems, only 13% are MDs. This means that most hospitals and health systems in the U.S. are run by non-clinicians who have zero hands-on experience treating patients. Who's in charge really matters. It's the hospital board and the CEO that set the hospital budget. It's the board and the CEO that have final say on what the hospital does or does not spend money on. So the question is, can a hospital run by non-clinicians do what's best for patients? Does a hospital board of non-doctors who have not taken the Hippocratic Oath really put the patient first? Now I should point out that there are a few notable exceptions.

Perhaps the most famous example comes from the world-renowned Mayo Clinic based in Rochester, Minnesota. It's where kings and presidents and all sorts of important people fly in to receive best-in-class, world-class treatment. Mayo is the number one ranked hospital by U.S. News & World Report and Newsweek. So, it shouldn't be any surprise that at the Mayo Clinic, 12 of their 15 board seats are held by doctors. That's 80%. 80% of Mayo's board seats are held by physicians instead of the national average of 20%.

And the CEO is, you guessed it, an M.D., Dr. Gianrico Ferruzio. And many Mayo physicians say its governance structure has been one of the keys to Mayo's success over the years. It's known for putting patients at the center of everything they do. And it's no accident that their board of doctors has been instrumental in making that happen and keeping it that way. So what do doctors think about the current state of affairs for hospital boards? Surveys of physicians routinely find that 90% of doctors think doctors themselves should make up the majority of hospital boards.

In other words, the vast majority of doctors do not agree with how hospital boards are run today. Of course, hospital boards themselves see things differently. Current hospital board members think physicians lack the business and management skills to effectively sit on a board of directors or run a complex organization. But according to Bloomberg, 53% of hospitals were set to lose money in 2022, while almost all are coping with record job vacancies and sicker patients. Seems like it isn't going that well with these non-doctor management teams.

Oh, and by the way, Mayo, the doctor-run hospital system, recorded a profit of nearly $600 million in 2022 on $16.3 billion in revenue. Go figure. Doctors, we need more of us in the leadership positions and boardrooms of America's hospitals. We need to get more vocal and exercise the power we have. There is a better way. Let's make it happen. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and this is Healthcare Uncovered, where we break down a broken system. it's probably a major time now for, probably two minutes since lardee lives. So makes people look great.

Well, I mean, please think this can be a foundation for us. If you'd like to speak uproot any razors, let's do something. Question size is what it needs to focus on throughout, however… Repeat that. And you won't need to make any comments..

