Title: Hospital Raises Prices if You Are Uninsured_J7hqEeFAAtQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7hqEeFAAtQ
Language: en
Duration: 5:47
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is hospital raises billed charges if you're uninsured. That's right. So this is a true story of what happened to my wife. So she needed an MRI and we actually don't have traditional health insurance. We use a faith-based medical sharing plan and that's a totally different topic for a different day. But we essentially don't have insurance and we don't have a network and so we're cash pay. So this is what happened. So she calls in advance for the price obviously because she's married to me.

That's what we do around here, right? And she's like, look what they told me was very high. And she talked to the frontline person. She even asked to talk to the manager. She's like, Eric, this does not seem right. It's a really high price. So I'm like, okay, I'll call. So I call and they told me the same price they told her. They said, look, the MRI is going to be $4,034. And I said, wow, is that the bill charges or is that the allowed amount? They said, oh no, that's after giving you a 45% discount. And the bill charges are $7,335 for the MRI.

At that point, I got a little upset inside. Okay. So I took some deep breaths and I tried to speak calmly to the woman at the other end of the phone, but this poor lady, she probably could tell that I was not really calm. And I said, I'm sorry. I work in kind of medical billing as well. And I know for a fact that at your hospital system, that your bill charges for an MRI are not $7,335. At which point there was silence on the other end of the phone. And then she said, okay, well, we kind of use this Nthrive computer system where we look up the national database of the average bill charges across the country for different services.

And that Nthrive database tells us that the national average for bill charges for an MRI, this particular type of MRI is $7,335. Again, pretty upset on the inside. Took another deep breath. And I said to her, okay, so you need to tell me that you're not going to use your own bill charges when you're calculating the discount for my wife's MRI. And she said, no, you're right. We should be using our own bill charges. So let me now do that. So our bill charges for an MRI are $3,849. We'll apply the same 45% discount, which means your cash pay allowed amount is going to be $2,117.

Okay, note, their own bill charges are essentially half as much as the quote unquote national average. Now, this woman also didn't know that I have looked at the bill charges for MRIs of literally hundreds of hospitals across the country. And I can even tell you that in my experience, that $7,335 is in no way, shape or form. The average bill charges for an MRI nationwide. Ain't no way. So I said, okay. And so the basic question, what in the world is Enthrive? It's a revenue cycle consulting firm. So they've been, there's a gazillion of these I used to work for.

I used to be a revenue cycle consultant like 20 years ago that helped hospitals get paid more money faster. So I looked up Enthrive. And so as part of their quote unquote service that they provide to the hospital, they provide this quote unquote benchmarking number that the hospital can then use to essentially double the bill charges for people that don't have health insurance. So listen, now whether this was an honest mistake or what was going on behind the scenes, I don't know. But all I know is that I knew for a fact that this particular hospital was not billing $7335.

And that $3849 still seemed pretty high. And that $2117 still seemed pretty high. And I'm like, okay, look, we had Blue Cross insurance last year. My wife had the same MRI the previous year. It seemed like it was a lot less. Is there any way you could look that up on the system? And she said, sure. So she looked it up. And sure enough, the Blue Cross allowed amount for the exact same MRI the previous year was $753, which for billed charges of $3849 comes to an 80% discount off of billed charges. So this particular hospital system not only effectively doubled the billed charges that they were going to charge us, but they're only giving us essentially half the discount that they give to Blue Cross.

Now, I wasn't going to get into an argument as to whether or not we should or should not receive the same discount at Blue Cross, but like the 45% isn't anywhere close to the 80% that Blue Cross is getting. So what's my point? At the end of the day, at a very basic level, this is called price discrimination. When you charge different customers different amounts for the exact same thing, that's price discrimination. Arguably, on a federal level, that's illegal. Now, this is not quote unquote interstate commerce.

I don't really know if the federal government has jurisdiction here. Like, I'm not going that far. But at the end of the day, the point really is, is that when you're dealing with any sort of medical billing, you need to be very careful. And you need to ask a lot of questions. You need to basically question everything. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

