Title: Hospitals Do Not Know Their Own Costs... Learn Why_BzvalVPUowE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BzvalVPUowE
Language: en
Duration: 3:15
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Here's a dirty little secret that no hospital executive wants you to know. Very few hospitals are actually managing their costs, and that is costing you money. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and I'm also a healthcare finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially, and that's why I've partnered with KnowMeHealth to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. Doctors, if you receive money from a hospital either because you are an employee or receive a stipend, then you need to know this.

Hospitals do not measure their own costs per service. How much does a gallbladder surgery cost at a hospital? Good luck getting a straight answer. How much does a patient in the ER for four hours cost? No one knows. How much does a CT of the abdomen and pelvis cost? They don't know. Most hospitals simply have no idea how much different procedures cost. The business discipline of measuring the cost of a particular service is called activity-based cost accounting. And the majority of hospitals in America don't do it.

But you're a doctor. Why do you care? You are getting paid, right? Not so fast. During salary or stipend negotiations between doctors and hospitals, hospitals frequently complain about how little money they have to pay doctors. Part of the reason for this complaint is because hospital management teams don't effectively manage their own costs. And you can't manage what you don't measure. Hospitals are poor managers of their own costs because they don't even attempt to measure them. There are exceptions, however.

There are some hospitals that do activity-based cost accounting and they know exactly what it costs to perform a gallbladder surgery or a CT scan. And guess what? These hospitals tend to be far more efficient and financially stable than those that do not. Here's a specific example. The University of Utah does activity-based cost accounting. It knows in detail that one minute in the ER for a patient costs the hospital 82 cents. It knows that one minute in the operating room for an orthopedic surgery costs the hospital $12.

And they know these detailed costs for all their services. They know what stuff costs. As a result of measuring their costs, the University of Utah actually became more efficient and lowered their costs, while almost all other academic medical centers saw their own costs rise. And they regularly give raises to their employed doctors. Doctors, you have a choice. You can raise your voice to hospital administrators about their own bloated costs, or you can leave. But you don't have to stay and listen to the same song and dance you hear year after year about there not being enough money.

The U.S. spends $4.3 trillion on health care per year. It's almost $13,000 for every man, woman, and child in America. Surely there's enough money. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and this is Healthcare Uncovered, where we break down a broken system..

