Title: Hospital Board of Directors Not Run by Clinicians_NK17qAlPTpk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NK17qAlPTpk
Language: en
Duration: 3:43
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is hospital boards are not run by clinicians. Yes, it's true. Now this point was brought to my attention by one of the viewers of my recent video about physicians being on salary and the Mayo Clinic because as we're going to talk about, the Mayo Clinic is different because of this. So let's dive right in. So nurses make up only 5% of board members for hospitals in America. 5%! And doctors only make up 20% of all board seats for hospitals in America.

That's right. So even if the doctors and nurses like all got together, that's only 25%, guess what? They're going to lose the vote. So that means that the people that are actually at the bedside, that literally are making decisions around patient care, do not represent the majority of members of hospital boards, of governments. In other words, the people that run the place. The people that run the place. Okay, now the Mayo Clinic is different. 12 out of the 15 members of their board of directors are physicians.

Let me say that again. 12 out of the 15 members of Mayo's board of directors are physicians. That is totally different than the majority of hospitals in America. Okay? Now, there are 5,627 hospitals in America, of which 87.5% are community hospitals. Now, of those community hospitals, 60% are tax exempt when referred to as not-for-profit hospitals. Now, there are a number of barriers to having clinicians as board members. Okay? There are government regulations around conflicts of interest and independence as it relates to board members.

So, I will not get into this today in detail in terms of like the amount of compensation that they can have, or they might change the rules on the board of directors just so that they can make more money if they're a practicing physician at that hospital. Okay, that's fine. The point is, Mayo was able to overcome that. So, I'm not going to offer a solution on how to get around these regulatory barriers today, but let's just say it can and it has been done. Okay, now, 90% of doctors say that physicians should be the major representatives on board of directors.

90%. Nine out of 10 physicians think this. Okay? So, in other words, the way hospitals are run is not consistent with the way physicians want them to be run from a leadership and a governance perspective. And interestingly, and I'll leave a link in the show notes to the peer review journal article that has all these statistics in it. Many boards think that physicians lack the skill to effectively serve on a board of directors. Okay, given the state of healthcare in America today, I'll just say that's debatable.

Okay, now, what's my point? My point is, is that, of course, healthcare is the way it is today when you have non-clinicians running the hospitals. Like, of course it's going to be this way. So, the question becomes, is it possible to make healthcare in America better without putting more clinicians on the boards? I don't know. It's up for you to decide. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Thank you..

