Title: Hospitals Measure Doctors By How Much Revenue They Generate_ygQvNxyitY0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ygQvNxyitY0
Language: en
Duration: 12:22
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is doctors as hospital revenue drivers. So doctors themselves drive a ton of money into hospitals. How much money do they drive into hospital systems? So according to a 2016 survey that was the most recent data I could find from a physician recruiting firm called Merritt Hawkins. They surveyed hospital CFOs and they found that the average physician brought in 1.5 million dollars per doctor per year to the hospital system in the form of tests and procedures and all those orders that they had.

Look when I worked at the hospital I was ordering CT scans. I was bringing in the ear, nose, and throat doctor or the cardiologist and they might do a cardiac catheterization or they might do some other sort of procedure. So when you add up the facility fees for all of those, all that healthcare stuff on average per doctor it was 1.56 million dollars per doctor per year. Now it varied by specialty so the survey broke it down by specialty. So orthopedics came in at the highest it was 2.75 million dollars per orthopedist per year of hospital revenue that they brought in.

Next highest was interventional cardiologist at 2.45 million dollars per interventional cardiologist per year in hospital revenue. Next up we had general surgeons at 2.17 million dollars per doctor per year of revenue that they brought into hospital. And then there was obviously a whole bunch of other specialties in there but then way down on the list was family medicine which brought in 1.5 million dollars per doctor per year. Now they're a little unique because the orthopedist and the cardiologist and general surgeons obviously they practice like in the inpatient setting in the hospital.

The vast majority of family practice doctors do things in the outpatient setting. Aha! But look they're still driving 1.5 million dollars of revenue because again so much of hospital revenue is actually driven on the outpatient basis. If that physician, if that family practice physician orders outpatient labs those are going to the hospital. If they order outpatient imaging those are going to the hospital. So that large movement for family practice and internal medicine physicians for primary care physicians to be employed by hospitals allows those hospitals to control that 1.5 million dollars of revenue generation.

In other words if the family practice doc was independent maybe half a million dollars would go to one hospital system and another half a million dollars would go to another hospital system and then another half a million dollars would go to a third hospital system. Whereas when one hospital system buys the family practice doc and their practice well then that one hospital gets all 1.5 million dollars and not just a portion of it. Now it comes at a cost and of course the cost is the pay for the physician.

So let's look at this revenue. So this Merritt Hawkins survey of hospital CFOs they looked at okay well how much does the hospital have to pay the doctor in order to drive that revenue. So for orthopedic surgeons they have to pay them on average about half a million dollars a year starting salary to bring in that 2.75 million. So if you do the math on that the 2.75 minus the 500,000 which means net the hospitals bringing in 2.25 million dollars in revenue. Now down here at the other end of the spectrum for family practice they make on average $198,000 starting per family practice doctor per year.

So you do the math on the 1.5 million minus the essentially $200,000 that gets you to 1.3 million dollars that each family practice doctor is bringing in. Okay so another way you can think about it is that you could take the pay of the physician and divide it by the revenue and that's essentially like the commission that the hospital has to pay the doctor in order to bring in that facility revenue. And so the commission amount for orthopedic surgeons is 18% the 500 grand divided by 2.75 million whereas the commission amount for family practice doctors is 13% the 200,000 divided by the 1.5 million.

So in other words family practice doctors don't get paid as high of a commission as orthopedic surgeons do. Now I'm intentionally using that word commission on purpose because I know it's going to ruffle some feathers but I want to make sure that you pay attention. Now another way to think about it is in terms of ROI so you can take the amount that you have to invest in the doctor in terms of their annual salary and divide that into the revenue. And that gets you a better ROI for the family practice physicians.

In fact it's a 7.5x ROI return on investment for every family practice physician where it's only a 5.5x ROI per orthopedic surgeon. And in fact the Merritt Hawkins survey says that family practice physicians and general internists have been the number one and number two most sought after physicians. Because Merritt Hawkins is a physician recruiting search firm. That family practice and internal medicine have been the number one and number two most recruited physicians for the past nine years. In part because they provide such a favorable return on investment for the hospital system.

So this got me thinking about some personal experiences that I've had. So I've got a friend who's a general surgeon at one of the local Dallas hospitals. And when he goes to work at the hospital so I'll see him and he's like oh I gotta go to work at the hospital. And he would refer to it as returning to the mines. Because he felt like he was working in a coal mine. So there's a lot of physicians that have this feeling where they're just churning through patients and they're just churning through procedures and they're just churning through RVUs.

And so it kind of feels like they're extracting coal from a coal mine. They're just a cog in the machine. Well that got me thinking, look at this. These were surveys of hospital CFOs. What does this mean? This means the hospital CFOs, they knew these numbers. And when I was a physician at a local Dallas hospital system, I was in one of their internal conferences or whatever. The CEO of the hospital spoke to us, you know, probably like 50 different physicians in the room, different specialties. And one of the things he said, like right off the bat, was he said, hey, you know, every physician at this particular hospital system is worth about a million bucks.

And this was at the time. So this was before this survey was taken. So, you know, at the time it was about a million dollars per physician instead of 1.56 million dollars per physician. So the hospital CEO knew that off the top of his head. So isn't that interesting? There's the classic management mantra of you got to measure what you manage. So they knew, the CFOs and the CEO, they knew that metric off the top of their head. Okay. Interestingly, what metrics did they not talk about? They didn't talk about, they didn't say what their central line associated bloodstream infection rate was.

They didn't say what their amputation rate was for diabetic foot ulcers. They didn't say what their readmission rate was. They didn't say what their post-operative complication rate was. But the number that they knew off the top of their head was the revenue per doctor. Isn't that interesting? So, now this is, this is, okay, what's my point? My point is, is that hospital revenue generation by the hospital administrators is, is a well oiled machine. And in a fee for service system, if I was a hospital CFO or CFO, I would be acting the exact same way that they are.

I'm not judging them for doing what they're doing. I'm just saying it's a well oiled machine. And if you are a payer, if you are a state, if you are the federal government, if you are a municipality, if you are a private employer, this well oiled fee for service machine is designed to be confiscatory of your healthcare spending budget. It is designed to bring in revenue per physician. Now, I've been saying this all along. I'm just going to say it again for repetition purposes. If you do nothing, then this confiscation will only continue and increase.

Okay. Healthcare costs don't happen by accident. They happen because people sit in rooms all day long and they strategize and they measure and they have metrics around driving healthcare revenue. Okay. So this is not an accident. It's highly intentional. Okay. My next point is, is that this video is not all doom and gloom. There is hope. There are physicians and there are hospitals systems that are looking to change what they measure because they're looking to change how they manage in a way that is much more patient centric and not revenue centric.

And what is that example? One example is the University Hospitals of Cleveland. So that is the other big hospital system within Cleveland other than the Cleveland Clinic. But it's a huge hospital system on its own and it's kind of been in the shadow of the Cleveland Clinic for decades. It's understandable, but it's got its own medical school associated with Case Western Reserve. It is a force to be reckoned with itself. And its chief clinical transformation officer is a gentleman by the name of Dr. Peter Protogos, who used to be at Johns Hopkins when I was there.

I think I mentioned in a previous video, we used to work out at the gym at the same time. I used to see him at the Cooley gym. Okay. But he was a big attending physician. I was just a little resident. I would not go talk to him. Okay. But the point is that he's instrumental in terms of making hospitals safer and more patient focused in terms of their metrics and their outcomes and improving hospital quality. And he's worked to do that with all of his colleagues there at university hospitals. Such that they won this huge award from the American Hospital Association for being the number one hospital in America for quality transformation.

And what are some numbers behind that? One, they decreased their central line associated bloodstream infections. In other words, these are essentially nosocomial infections that people got because they had a big IV, a central line, and then they ended up getting, you know, whether it be strep or staph or some other bacterial infection because of their central line. Listen, those infections should never happen. The point is that if you do the right protocol, those infection rates should go dramatically, like literally almost to zero.

And he has proven that over the years. And look, they decreased them by 80%. That's huge. Okay. Next up, and it's not just, and that's, listen, believe me, if you've ever seen a septic patient from a central line, like they don't look good. They got a fever to 103. They're breathing at like 32 times a minute. They're incredibly uncomfortable. Like it's miserable. Like forget about the money. Like if you can prevent somebody from feeling miserable from a central line associated bloodstream infection, like that's a worthwhile thing to do.

Okay. And then also they decreased cost as well. They decreased Medicare costs by 33% through their quality initiatives. So what you manage what you measure and you measure what you manage. And when you measure these patient centric, quality centric values, then you dramatically improve the management. And he even says that. And I'll leave a link to Dr. Pronovost's specific point, which is hospitals are filled with mismanagement. Okay. That's not a Dr. Eric Bricker quote. That is a Dr. Peter Pronovost quote saying that hospitals are filled with mismanagement.

And part of my point for today is part of the reason why they're filled with this management is because they're focused on measuring revenue dollars and not patient quality. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

