Title: Hospital Challenges_ Inflation and Competition_X12Ac6Het8I
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X12Ac6Het8I
Language: en
Duration: 11:37
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Hospital Challenges for 2023. Now today's video comes from a Becker's Hospital Review webinar. And I just want to tell you, for all you healthcare nerds out there like me, the Becker's Hospital Review website and their free webinars and all their other resources are fantastic. Now I have no association with Becker's, but I do want to say it's an incredibly helpful source of information. Now they have a webinar from the end of 2022 where they interview two CEOs, one from the Deaconess Health System, which is in Evansville, Indiana, and services the Southern Indiana, Kentucky, and Illinois areas, states.

And then an Intermountain Healthcare Hospital CFO in Colorado. Intermountain bought SCL Healthcare. And SCL was a small eight hospital system in Colorado, Kansas, and I think it's Wyoming. And so this IHC CFO was acquired by Intermountain. So it's interesting to hear her perspective as well. And then from Roper St. Francis in Charleston, South Carolina. So it gives you a very geographically diverse idea of what the CEOs and CFOs of these hospital systems are thinking about in terms of 2023. And then they also have some hospital consultants from VMG Health who are on the webinar as well.

So listen, if we work in employer-sponsored health plans, if we're insurance brokers, if we work in HR, if we work in the health insurance industry, right, the largest source of healthcare costs is hospitals. It's hospitals. So if we need to understand our own costs, then we need to understand what hospitals are going through. So what are the two major main themes that these folks discussed in this webinar? One, inflation. No kidding. It's everywhere, right? So hospital inflation has been about 16% for their overall cost structure in 2022 in both supplies and labor.

So, you know, hear about all sorts of labor shortages, whether it be in nursing and tax, etc. So their labor costs have gone up by 16%, but also their supply costs have also gone up by about 16% versus 2020, right? So it's not year over year. It's 2022 versus 2020 that it's gone up about 16%. So essentially from during COVID to now in this post-COVID era that we're in, right? So one of the main drivers from that on the labor side, this was from Roper St. Francis in South Carolina, was he said, look, they had to hire traveling nurses.

They were paying them $200 an hour. Now granted, that's what they were paying the agency. The agency wasn't necessarily paying the nurse him or herself $200 an hour. But if you put 2,000 hours in a year times, that's $400,000 per nurse that they were having to pay. And they were working alongside the existing Roper St. Francis nurses that were only making $30 an hour. Guess what that did? It ticked off the Roper St. Francis nurses. Shocking, right? So guess what they had to do? They had to give the Roper St. Francis nurses wages, a wage increase.

They had to give them a raise, right? Okay, so fine. So that caused labor inflation. And that played out in hospitals across America. Now, arguably, the existing Roper St. Francis nurses, maybe they probably deserved a raise. Now, next. So fine. So that's in terms of their overall cost structure. The next thing that they talked about was margin skimming. What does that mean? That these hospitals are seeing other hospital systems come into their turf, their geographic territory, if you will, and offer ambulatory surgery centers and imaging centers to skim margin away from these hospitals.

Now, why is that margin skimming? It's because ambulatory surgery and imaging tend to be the high margin services that hospitals make a lot of money on. And so one of the, and I will leave a link in the show notes to a previous A Healthcare Z video that I made. But one of the impetuses, especially for the ambulatory surgery centers, is that Medicare made a change where they already did it for knee and hip replacements, where it used to be on this thing called the inpatient only list, where it had to be done at a hospital.

But then they changed the Medicare rule. So now you can do hip and knee replacements at ambulatory surgery centers. So guess what? The number of hip and knee replacements that are being done at ASCs instead of at hospitals is going through the roof. And they're sunsetting all the surgeries on the inpatient list so that you can start doing more and more surgeries at ASCs versus at hospitals. So they see these competing hospitals coming into their turf and offering these surgeries at ASCs and taking margin away or patients away from their hospital system for these high margin services.

Let me give you some specific examples of that. So from the healthcare consultants at VMG, they said, look, that HCA typically had an outpatient facility to hospital ratio of 12 to 1. And HCA is increasing that to 20 to 1. They're going to have 20 outpatient facilities versus every one hospital at HCA. So they're moving to more and more outpatient services like ASCs and imaging. And where are they going to build that 20 to 1 ratio? In competing hospital systems locations. Okay. Next, U.S. Surgical Partners, which is owned by Tenant.

So Tenant used to be a quote unquote hospital company. They're shifting and becoming an outpatient surgery company. Essentially, that's their vision. Understand that U.S. Surgical Partners, which is the ASC division of Tenant, their EBITDA is 41%. Now, keep in mind that hospitals are making, you know, let's say 6, 7, 8, maybe 11% EBITDA typically. So you can see how the surgeries at 41% EBITDA, essentially four times what an overall hospital's EBITDA is, is a cash cow, if you will, for healthcare providers. Okay.

Next, Ascension has 61 ambulatory surgery centers across America. And guess what? They're planning on doubling that number. That's right. They're going to have 122 ambulatory surgery centers. And then finally, CHS and UHS, which are two other for-profit healthcare companies, they are also forming partnerships to increase the number of ASCs. So here you've got these hospitals that have a huge threat in terms of these high margin services being skimmed away from them. Okay. So they've got inflation and they've got margin skimming.

Those are their big issues. Okay. So fine. What are they doing about it? Interesting. Okay. SCL, which I said already is located in Colorado. It merged with Intermountain. Intermountain approached them and SCL said, we don't want to compete with Intermountain. So we'll agree to be bought. Now, interestingly, the CFO said that Intermountain makes 50% of their revenue from capitated premium, specifically from the select health insurance policy, health insurance plans, that Intermountain Health itself sells. That's right.

Because in Utah, you can buy Intermountain Health health insurance. It's called select health. And so the SCL hospitals in Colorado may move. Wouldn't that be interesting if Intermountain starts selling select health in Colorado? If you're an employer or if you're a company that has employees in Colorado, this is awesome. Like, you want this. This is a positive thing for you because health care in Colorado is incredibly expensive. So here, if you have a vertically integrated hospital system that's actually selling insurance as well, then arguably that select health insurance might be much more affordable than the existing health insurance that you have in Colorado today, which is based upon existing fee for service and hospitals in Colorado charge out the nose.

So this is a positive development for employers and employees in Colorado. Now, for Roper St. Francis in Charleston, guess what they're doing? They're moving their entire hospital. The main Keystone Hospital is sort of in a part of Charleston that's kind of the older part. And Charleston, believe it or not, the Charleston area has almost a million people. And it's really north and west of the city. So the hospital is basically going to move to where the patients are. So they also, listen, to their credit, they're like, look, we need to lower costs.

They get that health care is 20% of GDP and that 20% is probably too much. Guess how they said they were going to lower costs? By partnering with physicians. So even they themselves, the CEOs of these hospitals, they're like, if we want to lower costs, like that's not really on us to do that. Like the main cost driver is the doctors. So isn't that interesting? So just know that when we, you know, when we, you know, I want to say demonize, but when we say, look, hospitals are so expensive and they're increasing health care costs and yada, yada, yada.

Just know that interestingly, these CEOs, they really come across as herding cats. They've got a board. They've got the community. They've got the nurses and the techs. They've got the physicians. I mean, it's striking in this video, in this webinar, how little power these CEOs feel like they have, or at least they come across as being like, look, I wish I could snap my fingers and make things happen within my heart. I mean, it's like, I'm not going to go across the hospital system, but I just can't do that. Like they didn't literally say those words, but that was the impression that I got from watching this video.

So that's interesting, right? So we talk about physicians here on A Healthcare Z a lot. So just know that we're really going to change hospital costs. That these CEOs were like, well, you really got to change the physician behavior if you're going to change our costs as a hospital. Okay. And then finally, the last point from the consultants at VMG was that, look, for nationwide, for hospital patient volume now compared to pre-COVID, admins are only at 83% of pre-COVID levels. So all the inpatient admins have not come back.

ER visits are still at 91% of pre-COVID levels. So all the ER visit volume hasn't come back. And then the surgery volume is at 89% of pre-COVID levels. So overall volume for these hospitals is still down versus COVID, at least per these consultants figures. Now, interestingly, outpatient visit volume is still down as well. It's only at 86% of pre-COVID volume. And so really, when we think about this point up here about physicians lowering healthcare costs and value-based care, what you really need to see is this outpatient volume go up.

It should be 110%, 120%, 150% of pre-COVID volume. And you want to continue to see these numbers stay low. You want to see admins go from 83% to 80% to 75% to 70%. You want to see ER go down. You want to see the surgery volume go down. You want to see all this stuff go down. A hospital admit, in many respects, is a failure. An ER visit is, in some respects, a failure of the outpatient infrastructure of the health system. So you really want to see, it'll be interesting over time to see if this outpatient visit percentage can get above 100%.

And again, up to 120%, 150% of pre-COVID levels. Because then you're actually seeing the proof in the pudding where real quote-unquote value-based care is occurring. So these are the challenges that hospitals are facing in 2023. And I wanted to share that with you today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

