Title: Hospital Contracts Forbid Health Insurance Companies from Guiding Patients_A1X4dxrTjQA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A1X4dxrTjQA
Language: en
Duration: 4:46
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is carriers are contractually bound to do no steerage. Now what does that mean? So to start off with, hospitals provide an in-network discount to an insurance carrier network. They say, hey, we've got our bill charges of X and we'll reduce that amount to like one half of X. And the insurance carrier says, oh great. But then the hospital says, however, that includes all the docs within our hospital system. And as you know, hospital systems have become larger and larger from consolidation.

So this could be like thousands of doctors and that means all of their facilities. So it's not just one hospital. It's not just two hospitals. Sometimes it's like over a dozen hospitals. Sometimes it's dozens of hospitals. So to start off with, we need to understand at a basic level that in the world of PPO contracts, that that discount is given to the insurance carrier and the insurance carrier has to agree that they got to take the whole kit and caboodle at that hospital system. Okay. What are the ramifications of that? So this is a quote from 2018 when the Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas President, Dr.

Paul Hain, was speaking to a very large employer group here in Dallas, Fort Worth. And he said that, look, our challenge with negotiating with hospitals has less to do with reimbursement rates. It has less to do with the actual dollar amounts themselves. And it has more to do with the desire to direct patients. In other words, the insurance carriers didn't like their end of the deal of having to take all the docs and all the facilities. Because let's just say from a quality perspective, I mean, look, they got the data and they know that some of those doctors are not the type of doctors that they would want to have in their network.

And they've got some facilities that, whether it be from infection rates or complication rates or readmission rates or whatever, you're like, look, I really don't want people necessarily going to that facility. And for a carrier, the easiest thing to do to not have people go to those facilities or go to those doctors is make them out of network. Okay? So if the carrier could pick and choose which doctors and hospitals that they could steer their members to within a hospital system, then the president of Blue Cross Blue Shield would have never said this quote.

Okay. Example number two, Sutter Health, which is a huge hospital system in the San Francisco Bay Area, recently settled an antitrust case with the state of California. So the state of California went after and said, look, you have anti-competitive practices. And it was mainly around the fact of Sutter's contracting practices had this all or none, these all or none, no steerage terms. Okay. So in other words, there was no opportunity for in-network or out-of-network steerage for the insurance carriers in the San Francisco Bay Area.

You either had to take all the Sutter physicians and all the Sutter facilities or you needed to hit the highway. Okay. And guess what? They settled. The terms, this literally just happened several days ago. The terms are not completely revealed, but the point is they were going to get, they were going to be, they were being sued for $2.7 billion. Okay. Sutter has $13 billion of revenue a year. Okay. These are substantial sums of money. Again, because of the same issue of not being able to steer. So the point is, is that within a PPO contract, there's really this game of cat and mouse because I've been in many meetings where the carrier representatives talks about, oh, how they can identify high quality facilities and doctors, et cetera, et cetera.

But just know that for a lot of their contracts with the major hospital systems, that they're contractually prevented from doing steerage. Okay. Now, but you can't do it at the employer level. The biggest example, again, is Walmart, where just recently Walmart came out with the fact that they have a new benefit for their employees where they're going to provide quality scores for physicians in the specialties of primary care, cardiology, gastroenterology, endocrinology, OBGYN, oncology, orthopedics, and pulmonology.

Okay. Walmart, the largest employer in America. If their carriers could already do this for them, then why in the world is Walmart having to do it themselves? The reason is, is because you can do this at the employer level, but the carriers are contractually bound in their PPO contracts to not do this. Okay. And I'm sure there's some exceptions, yada, yada, yada, but overall that's the case. Now that can be confusing, but that is a super important point for everyone here to understand. So thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

