Title: Hospital Cost Accounting Explained_Sqa-m-AcYHE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sqa-m-AcYHE
Language: en
Duration: 6:07
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing hospital accounting. Now this might be the most boring topic ever, but I promise you if you stay with me till the end, it will become fascinating. Okay, fact number one, most hospitals do not do cost accounting. What does that mean? Most hospitals do not actually know what it costs them internally to deliver a carpal tunnel release surgery, to deliver a gallbladder surgery, to deliver an MRI, to deliver 30 minutes of time spent in the emergency room.

Okay, so there was a fascinating article about this from the New York Times in 2015 that I will put in the show notes. And as far as I'm concerned, this article should be like front page news like every day for every healthcare publication. It's that big of a deal. Okay, however, this article is about the University of Utah healthcare system, which went through an exercise where they actually figured out how much all of their care actually cost them internally. And guess what they found out? An ER visit cost 82 cents a minute.

And time in the operating room for an orthopedic surgery cost $12 a minute. So they actually knew literally what everything in their hospital actually caught them. What cost them? What's that called? Normal. What most normal businesses do. That's what we did at our company. It's what the automobile industry does. If any of you watching this video, run a business, you probably know how much it costs you to do various parts of your own business. Okay, that's a good business practice. That is quote, unquote, highly innovative in healthcare.

Okay, fascinating. This was such a huge deal that Michael Porter, who is probably one of the most famous business school professors in America, or even in the world from Harvard University, went to the University of Utah healthcare system to research this. And he said, look, this is amazing. This is the equivalent of like Michael Jordan saying that you are good at basketball. Okay, this is like a huge deal. All right. So now, as a result of this, let me go back a point here. As a result of knowing their costs, guess what the University of Utah healthcare system was able to do? They were actually able to lower their costs.

So their costs went down about half a percentage point. Whereas comparable academic medical centers in their part of the country actually went up by 2.9%. And that makes sense, right? If you're going to control costs and bring costs down, you actually have to know what your costs are. So if the vast majority of hospitals in America don't know what their costs are, then they're going to have a really hard time bringing those costs down. Okay, so that is like a basic fundamental that really everyone needs to understand.

Now, I have my own theory, point number four, as to why at the University of Utah, is there something in the water? Do they have something especially smart people there? Look, I'm sure they do have a lot of smart people there. But here's what Utah also has. It also has the Intermountain healthcare system. And Intermountain is like the major competing healthcare system for the University of Utah. Now, Utah is a unique state in that it has about 5 million people. And they're heavily concentrated, as you can imagine, in the Salt Lake City area, somewhat in Provo as well.

And so they've got most of their people kind of in one place. And they really only have two major hospital systems for those people. All right, what does Intermountain Healthcare have? It runs its own health plan. You buy Intermountain Healthcare insurance in Utah. And that means that Intermountain Healthcare is collecting premium and delivering care. What does that mean? Intermountain Healthcare is taking on risk. And as a result of that, they have created amazing care pathways. They have protocols. They have been trumpeted by both Democratic and Republican administrations.

I mean, they are just known as the best of the best in America when it comes to running a healthcare system. And the University of Utah has to compete with that. Okay? So this is my own theory, but they had to up their game in cost accounting in order to compete with Intermountain. Okay, guess what other healthcare system in America is thought of as one of the most innovative healthcare systems in America? It's the Geisinger Healthcare System on the eastern side of Pennsylvania in a completely separate part of the country.

What does Geisinger have in common with Intermountain Healthcare? It also runs a health plan. It collects premium. It takes on risk and it provides care. So that is a big deal. And that's why cost accounting is a big deal. And that is why, and that really gets to the root of so many issues in healthcare. And that is, it's the incentives. Look, when you're incentivized to be a more prudent steward of your healthcare resources, because you're taking on risk, guess what happens? Tons of innovation, tons of clinical improvement, tons of increased safety, tons of increased outcomes.

And so necessity is the mother invention. And so that is the punchline that I would like to leave you with today. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. and they're looking forward to Mich viendo german systems. and for certain social relations are there! So we are connected to this model so that you can see it may ½.

