Title: Hospital-Owned Health Plans_  Can a Hospital Effectively Run Its Own Health Insurance Company__JCGbCGcU46I
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JCGbCGcU46I
Language: en
Duration: 12:48
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is Hospital-Owned Health Plans. That's right, we're going to go through in detail what it would look like if a hospital actually started their own health plan, their own health insurance company, if they sold health insurance policies to individuals and companies and then also provided the care for them. And this comes based off of two wonderful papers from people at Milliman, from Courtney White and David Hayes. And one was a paper from last year, one was a paper from this year, and the two papers were tied together where Milliman kind of spells this out.

And it's fantastic, let's go through it now. So, Miss White says in her first paper that there are specific barriers that a hospital system needs to overcome in order to actually create a health plan or create and sell a health insurance company. And there's a lot of these barriers, but she very astutely points out a few that I'm going to highlight. So one, it's the first one that she says that the hospital has to over, has to have an appetite for cost control through managed care. I'm going to say that again.

The hospital has to have an appetite for cost control. Whoa! Full stop, as they say. Like, a lot of hospitals don't have the appetite for cost control through managed care. We know that because a lot of hospitals haven't gone through the process of creating a cost accounting system. And so really, if a hospital is going to have the appetite for doing cost control, then they themselves would have to go through the step of creating a cost accounting system. And I have another video that specifically talks about how CEOs can prioritize putting a cost accounting system into their sort of strategic plan.

Okay, fine. That's really an M here with a circle because that's really a question of motivation, right? Like, the tools and the outside consultants and the software and the technology and the data. I mean, it's difficult, but it can be done. Hospital system after hospital system in America, they're the minority. But other hospital systems that run their own health plans, like Intermountain, like the University of Utah, like UPMC, like Geisinger, all of these places have cost accounting systems. Okay, you got to have an appetite for it.

And Rob Demache from UPMC says, look, the cost accounting system is super important because it gives you a line of sight into the variability by specific doctor. So you can know which doctors are more cost effective and which are less cost effective in terms of their surgical procedures or their endoscopies, what have you. Who's using a ton of resources and who's very efficient in terms of their resource utilization. And then you can manage those physicians accordingly. You got to know. You can't manage what you don't measure, right? Everybody knows.

Okay. Now, the other issue that Ms. White brings up as a barrier are the capital requirements, the startup costs, and the initial losses that the plan might have, right? Because actuarially, they have to set their premiums. And if they don't set their premiums, right, then they're going to have to deliver more care than they collect in the premium. And there's going to be losses associated with that. So it's going to take a few years in order for them to sort of actuarially get some experience around that. Okay.

So that's ability. That's money. Okay. And as we live in this COVID pandemic, and as we live in this COVID world, the hospitals don't have money, right? Who's got the money is the insurance carriers. But the hospitals, because they've lost so much patient volume due to COVID, they don't really have a lot of money. So if anything, I've talked previously about hospitals really have to do this, and they really should do this, really should start their own health plan. Like, do they have the motivation to have the appetite for cost control? And do they have the money to do it? Honestly, for most hospitals, the answer is going to be no and no.

Like, it's what they should do. I think it's the right thing for their patients. I think it's long term, the right thing for the health and the viability of the hospital system itself. But in the short term horizon, like the next like, two or three years, like, I'll be honest with you, the vast majority of hospitals, there's no way they're going to do this, because they don't have the motivation or the ability to do that. But we've got to examine what this would look like in terms of the actual performance of the health plan in the marketplace.

In other words, the hospital wants to sell a health plan, could they actually sell it? And that's what the second article by David Hayes and Courtney White goes into. And they have this wonderful graph here that I have recreated, where on the y axis, you have the percent lower premium that the hospital's health insurance plan can over. In other words, is their premium 1% in the competition, 4% in the competition, 8% less than the competition, right? And then on the x axis, you have, okay, well, what percentage of their own patients on the health plan do they see within their own health system? That's steerage.

And the inverse of that would be the leakage. In other words, up here at the high end, they're estimating, okay, well, 85% of their health plan members would use their own health system. And 15% would go somewhere else because they had an emergency, they were on vacation, they were out of town, etc. Okay. And then at the low end, they've got only 60% of the patients actually using their own health system. And then the converse would be 40% leakage, right? Where, listen, they don't have a lot of strict controls around, you know, out of network and in network benefits.

They don't have a lot of good steerage by the outpatient physicians, etc., etc. Okay. So fine. So then the lower premium, right? That's the dependent variable, okay? So the hospital is going to try to control the steerage through plan design, referrals by the physicians, etc. And then they have these various lines for the percentage reduction in the unit cost for that hospital. In other words, how much more efficient did the hospital become in delivering a surgery, delivering an endoscopy, having their outpatient clinic performance, having outpatient surgeries, etc.? Okay.

Is it 10% better on a unit cost, 15%, 20%, or is it 25% better as a unit cost? In other words, let's say the cost of a laparoscopic cholecystectomy is $8,000. Well, this particular hospital, through its cost control measures and greater efficiency, they're able to do that for $6,000 instead of $8,000. So you have a 25% decreased cost in what they can perform a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Okay, great. Now, they're saying, look, they're kind of saying, look, right in the middle, if they have like 75% steerage, only 25% leakage, and if they can get 15%, you know, improved cost structure on their own side, then they can expect to offer a health insurance plan in the marketplace that's 3% less than the competition.

You know, and at the end of the day, I'm like, you know, that doesn't really have a wow factor. And you know, and this is where I need your input from the insurance brokerage benefit consultant and employer community. If you had an offer for a health insurance plan that offered you 3% lower premiums, I mean, would that really excite you? Like, I'm going to go out on a limb and say, that's not real exciting. I would say even the best case scenario, where look, you have 25% decrease in the unit cost, plus you have 85% in hospital plan steerage.

In other words, you're only doing 15% leakage, you can get the majority of your health plan members using your own doctors and hospitals facilities. You're still only talking an 8% premium improvement vis-a-vis the competition. All right, well, let's run the numbers on a group of 200 employees. Keep in mind, you're not going to do huge national employers, right? Because your hospital footprint is probably only in one major metropolitan area. And so you're really only going to get small group and middle market groups.

And if you go for a large national account, you're only going to be able to carve out those employees that are local anyway. So you can't even get a United Airlines of the world because they got employees all over the place. You can't even offer it to them, but you can offer it to like a company with like 200 employees. So let's use that 200 employee example. Okay. And let's just assume, we're talking 200 employees on the planet. Let's just assume that their revenue is $35 million a year and they got a 10% profit margin.

And let's assume that they have about, it's about $10,000 per employee per year, right? When you include like some, some are higher because they got employee plus spouse, others employee plus dependent, others are employee plus family, et cetera. Okay. That means that if you're saving 8%, or you're spending about $2 million a year on their health insurance premiums, that means that they're only going to save with this Milliman model, $160,000 a year when they're making 3.5 million in profit per year. In other words, it would only increase their profit margin by 4.6%.

If you go to the CFO or the CEO with that sort of like offer to increase your profit margin by 4.6%, like that's not too exciting, even in the best case scenario. Because remember, you're unseating the incumbent. You're an unproven health plan. You've never run a health insurance company before. Why in the world would they go with you? They're only going to go with you. The rule of thumb is, is you have to have a 10x value proposition vis-a-vis the competition, which means you're coming in 15, 20, 30% lower in terms of your premiums.

Now, my interpretation of this Milliman data is that they are leaving one important dynamic out. I think they're leaving it out on purpose. And that dynamic is, they don't account for any decreased utilization of members on this health plan from improved primary care, from third generation, patient-centered medical home primary care in the form of better utilization management, chronic disease management, mental health services, and health system navigation via the Intermountain Healthcare System. And Intermountain lowered their hospitalizations by 20%.

So it's not just a decreased unit cost. It's a decrease in the number of units. There's less people in the hospital. If this health plan for the hospital is going to be successful, it needs to have less people in the hospital. It needs to have less surgeries. It needs to have less endoscopies. It needs to have less tests. It needs to have less procedures. Okay. Milliman just talked about a decrease in unit cost, not a decrease in the number of units, not a decrease in utilization. And I think they did that on purpose.

And my thinking behind this is, is because if you go to your physicians, especially the specialist, and you say, we're going to decrease your patient volume, then that is essentially a betrayal of them. I mean, they're going to revolt. And if they have an option to go to another hospital system in their town, they will. If you go to the cardiologist and say, hey, we're going to do better primary care, so you're going to do 10% less stress tests, or you go to their gastroenterologist and say, you're going to do 20% less endoscopies, or you go to your surgeons and you say, you're going to do 20% less surgeries because we're going to do better primary care, then those specialists are going to revolt.

Okay. So now, now that is the culture change. Keep in mind, that is the culture change that is necessary to actually have more efficient, proactive, frankly, higher quality care, given this large amount of waste with excess resource utilization from too many tests and too many procedures. I mean, like, that's what it's going to take. And the specialists aren't going to like that. So listen, I applaud Milliman for these numbers. I think they're incredibly insightful. And I think if you as a health plan wanted to see how much you could benefit from improved unit costs through efficiency, put a cost counting system, et cetera, et cetera.

But really, if you're going to go into the health plan business, then you need to have the stomach to do, frankly, what Intermountain did and put in patient-centered medical home primary care that's going to decrease utilization of your health system. Geisinger is the same way. Geisinger is like, look, in 20 years, we don't even want to have our hospital anymore. Like it would be a success if we didn't even have a hospital anymore. Okay. So just know, and obviously you, you know, you are boiling frog this, right? I mean, you're not going to change it overnight.

You're going to have to slowly over time, get the specialists used to it. And some of the specialists are going to be on board and you're going to keep them. And some of the other ones are going to walk and that's okay. You're going to wish them well. But these are the detailed, hard decisions that a hospital system would have to make if they actually wanted to run their own health insurance company. And if they actually wanted to run their own health plan. And I think it's important for us to think about. And that's my point for today.

Thank you for watching a healthcare Z..

