Title: Hospital Employee Roles to Know if You or a Loved One Are a Patient_KHEOs4vSSN0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KHEOs4vSSN0
Language: en
Duration: 5:28
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing hospital employee roles. Now this is very pragmatic information for you or your family or your friends should any of you be hospitalized. And if you are a plan sponsor, then it's important to understand what employees and their family members are experiencing when they're in the hospital. Okay? So first up are nurses. And of course, nurses are the most, if not one of the most important people in the hospital.

And it's important to know that they typically have a ratio in terms of how many patients they take care of, right? So in the ICU, it can be one to one or one to one nurse to two patients. And oftentimes on the regular floor, it'll be one to four. And then it can go up as high as one to eight, especially at night, they tend to change that ratio. So it's important to note that if you as a patient or your family member, if you have a nurse, that they obviously have other patients that they're taking care of as well.

It's important to know too, that it's the nurses that are giving the medications in the room, right? So there's many different people that are coming into your room when you're in the hospital, but it's important to know that it's the nurses. There are lots of other things too, but it's important to know that it's the nurses that are giving folks the medication. Okay. Well, all of those nurses on the floor, they report to a charge nurse, right? So there's typically a nurse's station for every single floor or unit of the hospital.

And there's a hierarchy of command within those nurses. And so who's in charge of that floor or unit for that shift is referred to as the charge nurse. Now, the charge nurse tends to be one of the more experienced nurses and he or she, let's be honest, they oftentimes really know what they're doing. And so what's great about that is that they're a perfect place for escalation. So if something is not happening, right, you're not getting what you need, you have questions, you're confused, there's poor coordination.

And let's be honest, in the hospital, that happens all the time. Then really the first place that needs to be escalated to is to the charge nurse. You know, in my opinion, not really the doctor because the doctor, they're like hard to reach. The charge nurse is there on the floor. Okay. And oftentimes if they need to get the doctor or whoever they need to coordinate with, they do a great job of like making that happen. So if you don't feel like you're getting what you want when you need it, then the charge nurse is actually the first place of escalation.

Next up is the shift coordinator. So all of those charge nurses for each one of the units of the floors, they report up to the shift coordinator. And just like it sounds, that person is a nurse as well. And that person is in charge of that shift. So typically nurses will either work an eight hour shift or a 12 hour shift. And you can think of that shift coordinator almost like running the hospital for that shift, right? So they coordinate the patients coming in from the ED. If a patient decompensates and needs to go from the floor to the ICU or someone is discharged from the ICU back to the floor, it's the shift coordinator that is doing all that.

Now, typically those shift coordinators are very senior nurses and they might really, really know what they're doing. And so at the end of the day, oftentimes the charge nurse has to coordinate with the shift coordinator in terms of what's going on with you particularly. So just know now you may or may not need to talk to the shift coordinator yourself, but just know that there's another level of seniority above the charge nurse on your floor as well. Okay. Next up are techs, right? Again, we said that you have a gazillion people coming into your room when you're in a hospital.

And a lot of the people that are coming in are the techs. Now, oftentimes they are wearing scrubs just like the nurses are. It's hard to differentiate. And a lot of times people think that the techs are the nurses, but they are not. And the techs primarily take your vitals. So they'll take your temperature, your blood pressure, your heart rate. Some they'll watch you and they'll take your respiratory rate. If you have leads on you and they fall off, oftentimes they'll fix that. Now, sometimes the nurses will do that too.

So it's confusing, right? Because sometimes a nurse comes in and does that. A lot of times the tech comes in and does that. But just know that probably the majority of the time, it's actually the tech that's doing that. And also the tech is doing the finger sticks for the blood glucose and they're also checking your weight as well. So just know that there oftentimes are one or even multiple, a lot of techs on a floor that are almost acting like force multipliers for the nurses. And they're an incredibly important part of the healthcare team, but just know that they are not your nurse.

Okay. Next up is the clerk. And the clerk is different from the techs in that the clerk is sitting at the nurse's station and they're sort of like the administrative person. And what's important there is that it's the clerk who is most often answering the call button when you or a family member are calling from the room. Okay. So it's not a nurse, it's not a tech, but it's the clerk. And so the clerk has to escalate it to either a tech, because oftentimes when you need something like they don't escalate it to a nurse, they escalate it to like my IVs beeping.

They might send in somebody other than the nurse to check that, et cetera. Or, you know, I need to take, I need to have my tray taken away because I'm done with my lunch. Okay. Well, they might have a tech come in and do that. Okay. So it's important to note that the clerk is who you're talking to when you're, when you're talking in the room after you've pushed your call button. It's not a nurse. Okay. And so all of these folks work together as a team. And as you can imagine, it's variable. And some, and some teams work together great and others not so much.

Okay. But it's important to know who these people are because anybody who has been in a hospital knows that one of the things that happens is constant interruption. People are constantly coming into your room and you need to know who these people are. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare Z..

