Title: Hospital Executive Survey Reveals Layoffs_ NO Mention of Value-Based Payments_eVOXVbvrmA0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVOXVbvrmA0
Language: en
Duration: 6:22
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Hospital Executive Survey Results from Chartist. Now, the Chartist Group is a management consulting firm for hospitals. And they themselves have about 400 employees and they have offices sort of in the major cities in America like Chicago, Atlanta, New York, etc. And they recently published a survey, they went and anonymously published, anonymously surveyed the executives from major hospital systems. What kind of hospital systems are we talking about here? We're talking about, okay, the execs and management, now as most of the executives, so C-level folks, CEOs, CFO, etc.

26% of the respondents were from $5 billion plus hospital system organizations. Now, that is really big, that's like biggest of the big. And then the next 64%, so the majority of them were $500 million to $5 billion hospital systems, which is like a very sizable, multi-hospital, regional hospital group or medical center. Okay, so in response to coronavirus and COVID, decreased patient volumes, decreased revenue, decreased surgery. We've talked about this many times in previous A Health Care City videos. What are these hospital execs saying they're doing? They're reducing their costs.

Okay, that's kind of to be expected. Right, reducing costs in response to their reduced revenue. Now, let's talk about how they're reducing costs. This is very interesting. So, about half the respondents said that they were going to reduce costs by 10 to 20%, and the other half said that they were going to reduce costs by less than 10%. So, and they're going to do this over the next 12 months. Now, I'm just going to tell you about the math here. So, the United States spends about $1 trillion a year on hospital services.

So, if you extrapolated this to like all hospital services in America, okay, so half or less than 10%, and half or 10 to 20%. Let's just say on average it was like 10%. Well, 10% of a trillion dollars is $100 billion over the next 12 months are going to be cut out of the hospital systems in America if these executive plans come to fruition. Now, how are they going to achieve this? Now, it's interesting the euphemisms that this consulting report uses, but I had to write them down, right? Because it's kind of interesting, right? So, in terms of cost reduction, they talked about optimizing revenue cycle.

What does that mean? Revenue cycle is getting the bills paid. So, what does optimizing the revenue cycle mean? It means laying off billers. Okay, and they talked about workforce management. Okay, in the setting of cost reduction, that means laying off the clinical staff. They talked about streamlining management. Again, in the setting of cost reduction, that's laying off administrators. So, we talked about this in previous videos too. Layoffs, layoffs, layoffs. That's the main form of cost reduction for a hospital system because the main form of cost for a hospital is in their labor.

Incredibly people intensive services business. If you're going to cut costs, you have to cut people. Now, they have some other alternatives too. They're going to try to get better deals on their supply chain and they're going to cut or remove departments. Again, they have a euphemism for that. They call it rationalized clinical programs. I saw this myself at one of the hospitals where I was in medical school where they completely removed their inpatient psych ward because it was losing money hand over fist. Okay, so they cut out.

They eliminated their inpatient psych ward. That's another way of rationalizing a clinical program. Alright, now, here's where it gets incredibly interesting. What does this survey, what do these executives who are speaking anonymously, who let's assume they're telling us how they really think. What did they not say? Nowhere in this survey, nowhere does it say we're going to turn to value-based payment. Nowhere does it say we're going to increase the size of our ACO program. Nowhere does it say we're going to make a change to primary care or increase primary care services or take on risk or take on capitated payments.

Okay, so guess what? Value-based payments, ACOs, primary care, that's exactly what employers, the government, and patients themselves want. So this just shows the complete lack of alignment between the people running the hospitals in America and employers, the government, and patients. I mean, they're not on the same page at all. Okay, but okay, so fine. But, so what? Well, like, if I lived in a town that only had one grocery store, like, I would kind of expect that one grocery store to, like, not be aligned with me either, right? Because they would want to charge me as much as they could for my groceries, and they would want to give me, like, cheap, low-quality produce so they wouldn't have to pay a lot for it.

It's not have a, you know, wide selection of paper towels so they don't have to buy, you know, one type of paper towel, blah, blah, blah. So, okay, that's fine. And again, I've used the example of, like, how cable TV used to be, right? The cable TV tried to take as much of my money and your money as humanly possible while delivering horrible service, right? I mean, that's how cable TV was. So, what does that mean? What does that mean when there's a lack of alignment? That means there's a lack of competition.

There's a lack of competition because the only thing that causes a business or an organization to be aligned with its customers is because it has to compete for them. So, what this really displays is the lack of a competitive mentality in the executives of these hospitals. They don't think about competing because they don't need to. So, that's really my only point for today. It's like, again, I'm not, I'm just saying, look, this does not run through the PR department, right? We're hearing it. Let's take them at their word here.

And so, this is incredibly valuable feedback that we all need to be aware of. And thank you for watching a healthcare seat..

