Title: How To Sell in Healthcare Podcast Episode 1 Employer Market Segmentation_3E1Y_KHXcZI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KHXcZI
Language: en
Duration: 31:28
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker with A Healthcare Z, and today we're going to talk about how to sell in healthcare. So as a brief background, as one of the co-founders of Compass Professional Health Services and as the Chief Medical Officer, I actually had a ton of sales and marketing and account management responsibilities. So I was the first salesperson at the company, and I also started the account management, we called it client success, and I ran that for some period of time to about a team of 12, so it wasn't huge, but it wasn't nothing either.

And I actually, when we grew the sales team, I actually did the sales training and sort of co-ran the sales team as well. Well, again, it wasn't huge, it was about six salespeople. And, you know, we grew Compass to 2,000 employer clients, and we largely worked through brokers and benefits consultants selling to HR CFOs, CEOs. We did some direct sales to HR CEOs and CFOs as well. However, along the way, I learned a ton about sales. So when I speak to you about selling in healthcare, one, it comes from literally doing it myself for about 10 years from 2007 until 2018.

Okay, so that's 11 years. And then two, it comes from a lot of trial and error. So I, obviously, as a physician, didn't know anything about sales. So I had to really get banged up a lot in terms of my sales experience. And that, as you can imagine, that process of getting banged up in the sales process taught me a ton of things. And I would love to share those with you. So to make a long story short, let's get to the points. One of the specific things that we're going to talk about in how to sell in healthcare is, let's just start out with talking about channel sales to employers.

And so the way that the market is structured is very important to understand. So first of all, from an employee benefits, health insurance, you know, sort of vendor solution, et cetera, standpoint, the market really segments itself in a number of ways. One of the ways that it segments itself, first and foremost, is on size. And it really segments into, I'll call it, yeah, we'll just say three categories. So small group, mid-market, and what is sometimes referred to as large group or national accounts. And that includes both large.

And then for the really large employers, they even call them jumbo. I kind of think that's kind of a colloquial term, but that's actually the term that they use is jumbo, like jumbo shrimp. Now, the number of employees that are in each of these groups, you know, it's debatable, but I'll say in general, small group is up to 100 employees. Mid-market is between 100 and 2,000 employees. And large group, let's just say, is between 2,000 and 10,000. And then jumbo is 10,000 plus. And at the end of the day, there's really not that many companies that have, or organizations, whether it be, let's say, a large state government.

There are just not that many organizations that have more than 10,000 employees. And there's more companies that have between 100 and 2,000 employees. And then there's a lot of companies that have less than 100 employees, right? So it sort of stratifies, right? Now, the way that you sell, whether it be in employee benefits or health insurance or you're a specific, you know, vendor, like we were at Compass Professional Health Services and selling healthcare navigation services, is going to change depending upon which of those, let's call them three size employers that you're going to be targeting.

And one of the, and here's the reason why they as buyers are different. And it's a few variables. So one is, is that almost 100% of the small group are fully insured. And let's just call it about, you know, half to a third of the mid-market are also fully insured, right? Because you have a lot of groups between 100 and 300 employees that are still fully insured. They're not self-funded. And right there at 100 and 300 employees is where you start getting more groups that are, that are, you know, what are referred to as quote unquote, partially self-funded or self-insured.

And then almost invariably all the groups over 2000 are all self-insured. And so that dynamic also changes the way they buy things. And then the other big dynamic that changes the way they buy things is the staffing of their quote unquote HR department. So for a small group, oftentimes you have one person, maybe one person that's doing all HR functions, whether it be compliance, recruiting, even things related to performance evaluation, compensation, and all the benefits. You know, shoot, just run on payroll, right? So you might have one person that you might have somebody who's like the CFO, controller, or even the business owner, who frankly is doing all those functions as well.

So they're almost basically like a part-time. Only one of the many hats they wear is HR. Once you get over 100 employees, you're typically having a dedicated HR person. And in the mid-market, you start having more than one HR person. And that's where in the mid-market, you start to see a dedicated, let's just call them compensation and benefits or benefits HR person, where they're specifically dedicated to that role. Now, you don't always see that. Sometimes they're still an HR generalist, but that's where you start seeing a dedicated person within the company who, you know, every day they wake up and they think about the employee health plan and their, you know, 401k and all these other things associated with benefits.

Now, as you get towards the upper end of the mid-market, you might even have a small benefits team. And by team, I mean like maybe it's like two, maybe three people where they might have like a benefits analyst that works underneath that benefits person. And then that benefits analyst and the benefits person then report to the head of HR. And that head of HR then, again, in a mid-market size company, they might not report directly to the CEO. I mean, in small groups, they report directly to the business owner, CEO, et cetera, because the company is so small.

But in a mid-market company, they typically will report to, they could report to the CEO still, or they could report to the CFO, or they could report to the COO. So you start getting some levels of bureaucracy in there, and that affects the buying process. And then obviously, when you get to a large group, that's where you have a dedicated benefits professional, almost invariably a benefits quote unquote team. And again, even in large group, over 2,000 employees, you still could only have a team of two.

Now, sometimes you could have a team of two, three, four, especially for jumbo employers, you could have an employee benefits quote unquote team of four or five people even. I would say that for a fairly sizable, let's say 10,000 employee company, you typically still would only see like a benefits quote unquote team of three people. They're not going to have a ton of folks. And okay, so that's how internally they are structured as buyers depending upon their size. Now, how that then relates to channel sales is that for small group, that one HR person or someone who's wearing the HR hat part of the time is really relying, I'll just say 100% on their insurance broker to tell them what to do because they don't have the time or the expertise to do that.

They don't have the bandwidth to do that. So they'll spend the time, sometimes a lot of time, sometimes a little time in vetting out insurance brokers. But once they make that decision, then that insurance broker is really going to be driving the decision making at that company heavily, right? Obviously, the ultimate budgetary decisions as to whether or not to buy something is up to the company, but they're really going to lean on the advice of the broker as to that. Okay, so that's one. Now, in the mid market, it's still, you know, it's obviously in the fully and also in the fully insured business, this is where you have that broker type of relationship where the broker is being paid a commission by the insurance carrier, you know, all the other products that they're selling, you know, dental, vision, major medical, and they're not being paid by the employer.

Now, in the mid market, again, it's still typically a brokerage relationship and they're brokering for the fully insured groups. Now, once you become self-funded, they're still oftentimes the quote unquote broker because it's the reinsurance that is paying the broker a commission and they might be getting commissions on the other things that they sell. So a lot of the work site benefits, you know, so things like Aflac and Colonial for accident and disability and cancer policies, a lot of the quote unquote brokers make a lot of money in the mid market because of those, it's a large number of employees.

So you can sell more of these, you know, Aflac Colonial type plans. So they make a lot of money that way. Now, because they have a dedicated benefits person, then typically that person has the time and much more expertise than a small group HR generalist or somebody who's just part-time HR. So what does that, what does that mean? That means there's almost more quote unquote shared decision making between what the broker is doing, is suggesting that is done and what the employer does. And it also means also in terms of approaching a, a mid market company, there actually is a person to approach, right? If you approach a small group company, they'll be like, look, I don't deal with this at all.

You just need to talk to my broker. And even in the mid market, a lot of times you'll approach a, let's say you approach a VP of HR and they'll be like, look, you just, you just got to talk to my benefits person. And that benefits person might actually take the call with you or read your email or attend your conference or whatever. Now, a lot of times too, they'll say, okay, can you just, I vet everything through my, my broker. Can you just talk to them first? And so it's important to know that in the mid market is where you can actually start some direct outreach to employers.

Now they'll still typically loop in their broker in terms of making that decision, but at least you can do some direct outreach. Okay. And finally, in the large market, oftentimes that is the quote unquote benefit consulting relationship where that consultant, I won't even get into override payments and stuff that that quote unquote consultant is getting paid, but that consultant is also charging a fee that is actually paid for by the employer as opposed to a commission from the, the insurance carrier.

And so in that quote unquote consulting relationship, then the employer, uh, that benefits person of the benefits team and that head of HR, they have much more confidence. Typically they have experience with prior self-funded plans. And so a lot of times it not only will it be, it'll be, sometimes it'll be heavily consultant driven and they'll tell the group what to do. Sometimes it will be shared decision-making. And sometimes, especially for the larger end of the large group, 10,000 plus employees, it will be heavily, uh, employer, HR, and that dedicated benefits person, uh, driven because they have the confidence and the expertise and the time to actually be able to make these types of decisions.

And then they'll use their, uh, their consultant for, you know, let's say due diligence activities. So the, the consultant still needs to be brought along and, uh, and as part of the quote unquote buying team, but they aren't the head of the quote unquote buying team in the large group. It's really the employer itself that is typically the quote unquote head of the, of the buying team in that sort of situation. So here you have small group, mid group, uh, large market, and that depends, uh, and that dictates rather kind of how you do channel sales.

So people say, okay, well, do I go direct to the employers or do I go to channel sales? And the answer to that question is yes. And it depends upon the size employers that you are going after. And a compass, we went after all three markets. So, and that's totally okay. And it's just important to know that the way that you approach those, uh, those groups or those employers is going to vary. Even if you have, um, a solution that can be used by all, uh, three sizes. Okay. So let me, let me just, you know, pause there and say, okay, well, that's, that's grouping based upon size.

Now there's other ways that the employers also group themselves that will, or segment, the market will segment that will be important for you to know from a, and when I talk about this in regards to sales, this is also, this is start at the very top of the funnel in regards to prospecting, right? So the way that you prospect these different size groups is going to be different based upon their size, right? Okay. Okay. So the way that you prospect other market segments will also vary. Okay. What are some other ways that, um, that employers segment? Well, obviously the next one is geographically.

So if you're going to prospect, then prospecting geographically is a, uh, is a very effective way. In other words, you would want to focus your prospecting geographically for businesses that are domiciled or headquartered in a particular metropolitan area or in a particular state or in a particular region of the country. So that, that focus geographically we found to be very important. You, you know, you don't, you don't scatter shot all across the entire country, that country that spreads you way thin.

And the reason that you want to, um, focus geographically is of course, from a prospecting and a sales perspective, one of the best things that you can generate is word of mouth. And this is where Jeffrey Moore from the book, Crossing the Chasm and Inside the Tornado, this, you know, he really was the one that wrote about this and we followed his playbook. And I would say that it totally worked. And what you're doing is you're creating momentum and word of mouth within a market segment. And if the market segment involves people that don't talk to each other, then the word of mouth can't spread.

And I'd say with HR people, one of the most common ways that word spreads among HR people is just geographically at a very basic level because HR people tend to move from company to company. And so if they use your solution at one company and then they move to another company, well, they're going to move geographically to that same area. Likewise, if they, those HR people will know other HR people, again, geographically within their area, whether it be through, um, the, you know, the, the SHRM, uh, society, or there's different, you know, benefit societies or, or organizations, uh, as well, whether it be, um, through, uh, you know, there's a, there's a group called web.

Um, there's obviously the, um, there's the, there's the SEABS group. So there are these other groups where these benefits people and HR people will sort of have a community and they will talk. And so you will want to take advantage of that because that'll give you leverage with your prospecting so that you can actually reach people that you might've not directly talked to. Okay. Now the important thing about geographically, in my opinion, and, and, and in our experience is that you really need to have those geographies based upon the number of, whether it be businesses or in our case, we would really measure things in terms of employee lives.

And you don't want to do it based upon the size of the state. Cause that's when you get into big problems with really, really big states versus small states. And so we're in Texas. It's a really, really big state. It's essentially like its own country. I would argue that, uh, California is kind of like its own country. I would say that even Florida is like its own country and even Ohio is like its own country and New York is like its own country. And that if you have somebody who has, you know, even in a, you know, quote unquote, um, you know, let's just say geographically medium sized state like Ohio, that Cincinnati is very different than Columbus, which is very different than Cleveland.

And so to be able to address people in each of those three metropolitan areas, it's actually pretty specific. Likewise, the Dallas Fort Worth area is very different from the Houston area, which is very different than Austin, which is very different than San Antonio. Uh, and of course in California, you can say Northern California, Southern California, but even within Southern California, Los Angeles is very different than Orange County, which is very different than San Diego. So it's very important that when you are focusing on businesses with, you know, and selling in healthcare, that you have a very specific geographic, uh, focus, whether that be per, by sales person, um, or, um, or even teams of salespeople that you give them very specific geographies.

Now, um, so, so G, so geographically is one way and we, and so probably the third way that you can then segment is by industry. So you wouldn't say, okay, so you've got like size of business and then you've got the geographic location of the business and then you have the industry. So in other words, retail, in other words, manufacturing, in other words, professional services like accounting or consulting or law firms, uh, in other words, software, in other words, so government and municipalities, we tried that approach at Compass.

And I would say that that was far less successful that if you gave a sales rep a specific, now the way that that sales rep would approach those different, um, industries would change within that geography. So in other words, within, let's say, um, let's say Houston, because obviously they do a ton of oil and gas. The way that you would approach, uh, oil and gas employers within Houston would be different than the way you would approach, um, you know, healthcare medical device businesses within Houston as well, because Houston has this huge medical district with MD Anderson, UT, et cetera.

So they actually have a lot of sort of healthcare medical related businesses in Houston as well. And the way that you would approach one of those companies is different than the way you would approach an oil and gas, uh, services, uh, company. So based upon the size of the, and of course, within oil and gas, you have huge companies like Shell and Exxon, and then you have medium size, let's say oil and gas exploration companies that might be based in Houston, but because they have, you know, 500, 800 employees, they'll have employees doing either drilling or what's called midstream in other parts of the state and other states, as well as a more geographically diverse employee population.

And then you'll have these very small niche oil and gas services companies that like all they do is fly helicopters full of workers out to the oil rig platforms in the Gulf of Mexico. And that's like an 80 employee company that flies these helicopters. So you'll have different size employers within that industry segment of oil and gas within the metropolitan area of Houston. So those, those are probably the big three ways that it is helpful to segment business to business sales within healthcare. And I'm going to make this, we're already running on 20 minutes here, but I'm intentionally going to make this, uh, longer because the whole point of doing this as a, as a podcast is so that while people are like doing other things or driving in the car, they can keep listening to something sort of longer.

So I'm intentionally without having to push stop, or you don't have to search for like another, uh, recording, et cetera, et cetera. So I just want to make this longer on purpose. So we've talked there about, uh, market segmentation and how that's going to relate to then, uh, channel sales, right. In terms of whether or not they're going to be going through their broker or their benefit consultant. And so probably the next thing that would be important to talk about regarding the prospecting, cause that, that's, that market segmentation is more of a, it could have, you know, sort of a strategic thing in terms of, um, kind of where you're sending your messages.

Now let's talk about the content of the actual prospecting messages themselves. Okay. Now let in, in terms of the tactics around the prospecting, obviously you have to interrupt and then you have to, uh, engage and then you have to educate and then you have to offer. And I was taught, those are kind of the four steps of prospecting, interrupt, engage, educate, offer, interrupt, engage, educate, offer. And the offer isn't, do you want to buy my product? The offer is oftentimes another opportunity to educate yourself more, whether it be about the specific problem that they have or about your specific solution, but the offer is not, Hey, do you want to buy? Because very few companies are going to go from being interrupted to buying on the first interaction, right? So the classic statistic is like that, uh, a buyer has to test to interact with you and your product or, or service at least seven times, times before you can even sometimes even get their attention.

And that the percentage of, of quote unquote sales that come after the first interaction is infinitely small. And that on average, it takes like between like four and 12 interactions to actually get them to buy. And as you can imagine, that stratifies across the size employers. So the smaller employers tended to buy after about, let's say four interactions and the much larger buyers, they took like 12 interactions. And so then that affects your, uh, your sales, the, the length of your sales cycle as well.

So you could have, uh, small groups that had, you know, sales cycles that might be measured in weeks or months. And you might have, you know, groups over 10,000 where they actually have like multi-year sales cycles. Okay. So it's important to understand that, um, that the number of times that you're, going to need to touch these people from a prospecting perspective, um, is going to need to, it's, it's just going to need repetition, right? And it's going to, and that prospecting is going to involve that process of interrupt, engage, educate, offer.

Okay. Let's talk about interruption. Okay. How are you going to interrupt these people? Well, you're going to interrupt them either with an email, you're going to interrupt them. Okay. Let me take this back. You're going to interrupt them either through an inbound or an outbound fashion. I have to think in terms of buckets. Okay. So outbound interruption, um, I guess it's sort of synonymous is basically they're going about their day and you get in front of them and you get in front of them. Okay. How do you do that? You get in front of them and they're obviously in their email inbox, you get in front of them by calling them and by calling them almost nobody answers their phone anymore.

So what you're going to do is you're going to interrupt them by leaving a voicemail and then you're going to interrupt them in person. So you have to go where they are and that's going to be at like one of these monthly meetings for one of their societies, whether it be a business group on health or SHRM or web or whatever, uh, SEEBS, or you're going to interrupt them at a conference. Okay. So you got to interrupt them in person. Now the other, then there's like inbound marketing where they're like searching out something, whether you're, let's say you're like a PBM vendor or let's say you're a vendor related to some sort of point solution, whether it be around diabetes or mental health or what have you.

And they're out there actively looking for a solution. So that's inbound. Okay. And that can either be in the form of social media and the A number one social media platform for business to business sales and healthcare sales is LinkedIn. Like there's really, in our experience, there's really no reason to involve yourself in any other platform other than LinkedIn. Okay. And then two, they, you might do, uh, you know, uh, do it through Google. And the way you do it through Google is through two, um, two different ways.

You're either going to do it through search engine optimization, or you're going to do it through, um, pay-per-click where you show up in the Google AdWords at the top of the search. Now people might say, okay, well this is, this goes sort of sounds like marketing to me, but I will say something that is incredibly important is that sales and marketing need to be intimately coordinated. They need to be the attached at the hip. And you know, at a lot of companies at Compass, when we were small sales ran marketing.

And when we had a separate marketing department run by separate, um, marketing leadership, I would talk with the head of marketing daily. I mean, he was one of my closest associates within the company and we were constantly bouncing ideas back and forth with each other. And guess what we found when we were doing that, that we were actually misaligned like on a daily basis. He was like, well, I want to do this. And I was like, well, I want to do that. And then I was like, well, I want to do that. And he's like, well, I want to do this.

And, but the point is we would work through it through constant communication. And as a result of that, we had an intimately coordinated sales and marketing department. I mean, it was awesome. Like I would argue that that, and probably, you know, one of the stories around that is we were, we were having a dip in our sales, um, frankly, because we were not coordinating our sales and our marketing as well as we should. And we didn't spend a dime more on marketing and just through better coordination of marketing with sales.

And really the point of marketing and business to business is, is lead generation. I mean, that's, that's the metric that marketing is going for is to generate leads. Uh, so that, that quote unquote prospecting is really the handoff there, but it's sort of the gray area. Like is, is, is Mark, is prospecting owned by marketing or is it owned by sales? Well, that's, we'll talk about that in another conversation. That's a very important conversation to have, but that, you know, that lead generation and that very close tie between sales and marketing really turned us around.

And we had a real explosion in sales in large part because of that, such that close alignment between sales and marketing. Okay. So you're going to interrupt. Let's talk about, um, you know, let's talk about outbound interruption because I will say at the end of the day that that outbound, um, interruption is, um, is how I would say the majority of the sales ended up happening. If we ended up looking back at it, another way to think about this is Aaron Ross, um, who, uh, who has written a number of fantastic books about sales.

I would highly recommend, um, the, uh, the Aaron Ross books on, uh, prospecting, prospecting lead generation and sales. We followed his playbook as well. And it totally worked. It totally worked. And he is sort of a sales and marketing, or excuse me, a sales and prospecting guru in, you know, not to overuse the word guru in Silicon Valley. Like Silicon Valley loves this guy for good reason. He is so good. Um, now, and one of his books probably, I think it's his first one is called predictable revenue. And, uh, I think the next one is called from impossible to inevitable.

Um, so he talks about seeds, nets, and spears. Okay. And so spears is his dedicated, like nifty 50, like a list of people that you're going to go after and you're going to specifically target them. And you know, so, you know, Joe or Jane, so-and-so is the head of benefits at XYZ company. And that works well for the large market. You want to do spears on the large market. You maybe even want to do spears in the mid market. Okay. So that's, and you're, and you're going to be doing outbound to them. Okay. And then you've got, you've got your nets, which is sort of your broadcast outbound where you're doing broadcast, uh, cold calling.

I mean, I will tell you as a physician, even through the end of, in 2018, when we sold compass, I was still cold calling in 2018. I'm probably one of the few physicians in America that actually cold calls people because at the end of the day, you need to call people. Okay. Cold calling is not dead. Yes. It's got Aaron Ross calls it cold calling 2.0. You need to do it. Okay. Now I would say that it's not really even cold calling. It's cold voicemailing because you're not going to ever talk to anybody, but you still need to do it.

Okay. So, uh, or that's going to be, um, you know, it's going to be email blasts. Well, and I don't really like to use the word blast because this is not spamming. Um, but they're obviously interrupting people with email is another way that is, I mean, it's still effective. So, and then, and then, so there's C and then I would say that LinkedIn posts probably falls into nets as well, more of an inbound net, but that's still a net. And then there's seeds and seeds is basically your Rolodex. And so in the employee benefits world, you might've been selling for 10 years already.

And do you have an extensive, um, um, Rolodex. Now when I started out, I had Rolodex of zero. So I did not start out with any seeds. And the point is the seeds is that these are plants that you've already planted seeds in previously. Um, so that's what I refer to as seeds. That's just another name for your Rolodex. Okay. So you don't have to start out with a Rolodex. I started out with a zero Rolodex and that's totally okay. Um, and so when you're, let's just, and then now what you basically have to think of is a matrix for, let's just call it small, medium, and large market.

And then you have, uh, seeds, nets, and spears for small, medium, and large. And that's an important distinction because you have the way that you think about seeds, nets, and spears in small is different than the way you think about seeds, nets, and spears for medium or mid-market. And it's, and it's different than the way you think about seeds, nets, and spears for large groups. And so not to become tedious, but tactically that is super important. If you try to apply the same seeds or nets or spears approach across all size employers, it will fail.

It has to be concentrated on the, uh, specific, um, market, uh, size that you're going after. So I'm going to pause there at 30 minutes. I hope you have reached your destination in your drive or whatever you're doing, washing the dishes. And, uh, we will pick up there, uh, next time. So again, this is Eric Bricker with A Healthcare Z. Thank you so much for listening on how to sell in healthcare..

