Title: How Hospital Charity Care Works_MNli6vdwPi8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MNli6vdwPi8
Language: en
Duration: 4:15
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing hospital charity care programs or sometimes they're referred to as financial assistance programs. Okay, so not-for-profit hospitals in America are required by the IRS to provide what's called community benefit because these not-for-profit hospitals oftentimes don't have to pay any federal, state or local tax. In order to qualify for that they have to provide this community benefit of which charity care or in other words free care for people that qualify is an important part of that.

Okay, now there are various eligibility requirements so every hospital has different eligibility requirements. I'm just going to use these as a real-life example of a local hospital and their eligibility requirements. Okay, so for this particular hospital system you have to be a US citizen and you have to live locally in a county where they have a hospital or if you are, if you had emergency services you don't necessarily have to live in one of those counties. In other words you could be visiting your grandma and you could be from a different state and you would still qualify but it would have to be for emergency care.

Now they do make another exception which is to say that look if you live outside one of those counties and it's a non-emergency service and there's just no doctors or hospitals that can treat you for your particular condition or disease then you might still be able to qualify. Okay, so those are basic requirements. Next it has to be within a certain amount of time, right? So it can't be, it has to be either within the date that it's scheduled or within 365 days of when you received a bill. So you can't go back two years, three years, four years, so time to a certain extent is of the essence in terms of application.

Okay, next is the financial eligibility and this is where you need to be able to provide documentation to prove these things. But all that aside, if you're indigent, in other words if you make less than 200% of the federal poverty limit, which is $51,000 for a family of four, then you would qualify to have your hospital bill paid for. Now, you could have insurance, okay, and it would be the remaining balance after insurance is paid and it would still pay for it if your family made less than 200% of the federal poverty limit.

Guess what? 28% of American households make less than $51,000, make less than 200% of the FPL. Okay, so that's a lot of people. So if you're an employer, you probably have some employees that fit into this situation. Okay, so let's say you make more than 200% of the FPL. Well, you can qualify for what's referred to as medically indigent as well. Where if you make less than 500% of the federal poverty level and the amount you owe is greater than 5% of your annual income, then you would also qualify. So let's run the numbers on that.

Okay, so a family of four, 500% of the federal poverty limit is $129,000. So that's for a family of four. That's 75% of households in America. In other words, that's the majority of Americans actually fall into that category and would potentially be eligible. Okay, now 5% of a year's income, let's just say, let's round it to $130,000. So 5% would be $6,500. That means even if you have insurance, if you had an out-of-pocket responsibility in excess of $6,500, then that would be covered at 100% by the hospital's charity care program.

So in other words, if you, let's say you had a high deductible plan with a $5,000 deductible and 20% co-insurance, it's very easy to have an orthopedic surgery or even to have a variety of outpatient tests and procedures done where that total bill adds up to in excess of $6,500. So what's some practical information that you can do here? Okay, so the way that you get started in this process is to ask for the hospital's financial counselor. And every hospital I've ever worked in has a financial counselor.

And you can either contact them by phone, sometimes you can do a web inquiry, but if the information is not posted on the hospital's website about their charity care program, then what you want to do is you want to call the hospital and ask to speak to a financial counselor to see if you qualify. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

