Title: How to Get Into Medical School PODCAST Episode 2 How to Get Good Grades in Pre Med Classes_xMO6t4jYWDc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xMO6t4jYWDc
Language: en
Duration: 24:42
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker with A Healthcare Z, and this is the How to Get Into Medical School podcast. Now, in today's episode, we are going to talk about how to get good grades in your required pre-medical classes in college, those required pre-medical classes being one, general chemistry, two, organic chemistry, three, physics, and four, biology. Now, I say them in that order because that is the order that I took them in, and that is the order that most people take them in. And let's start out with just the general order that people take this.

Now, it depends upon whether or not you took AP chemistry in high school and therefore potentially tested out of chemistry as a freshman. But let's just assume for the sake of this podcast that you did not. I did not. And therefore, during your freshman year, you will need to take general chemistry for the entire year. Typically, in your sophomore year, a person then takes either a combination of organic chemistry and physics or organic chemistry and biology. Now, depending upon your school, organic chemistry and physics is easier than organic chemistry and biology because biology in many institutions is a harder class than physics is.

Now, that was true where I went to college. I was also not a biology major. So I put off taking biology until my junior year. Now, I also did that because I knew I was going to take some time off. And so I did not need to complete biology before taking my MCAT. So for people that want to go straight through four years of undergrad and then medical school, oftentimes they will take their MCAT during their junior year of college. And if you take biology in your junior year of college, then you haven't finished biology by the time you need to take your MCAT.

So at a minimum, if you're going to be taking general chemistry your first year, organic chemistry and physics your second year, biology your third year, then you can take your MCAT your fourth year. Apply during the application essentially takes a year during a year where you're going to be working or you're going to be doing something for that year between college and medical school. And then after one year, you can go to medical school. I actually worked for two years. I was a hospital finance consultant for two years learning how the healthcare industry worked from a finance perspective.

It was a fantastic opportunity. And I'm so glad that I did it. Not everybody wants to or has to do that. It's certainly understandable. Some people want to go straight through. I had a very straightforward pre-med advisor in college who essentially said, it is super hard at this institution to cram all of the required pre-med classes into your first two years. You will essentially kill yourself, figuratively, not literally. And so if you space it out, it just makes it easier. It doesn't make it easy. It's still incredibly hard.

But I guess the key is, is that by spreading it out, it allows you to do better in each one of those classes so you can actually get a good grade. If you try to cram those four pre-med classes into the first two years, then you'll be just studying so hard that the light – and it's all a matter of probabilities, right? The probability that you would be able to get A's in all four of those classes is probably much lower than if you spread them out over a third year, your junior year. So it is really important to get good grades to get into medical school.

So a strategy for getting good grades on your pre-medical classes is to spread them out over more time and don't go straight from undergrad into medical school and either take one or two years off. So you can think of it as an insurance policy. That is insurance. It buys you time for getting good grades in those classes. And many of my peers did that and ended up getting good grades. I did that and ended up getting good grades. And I saw people that did not do that. And they tried to cram them into just two years and they ended up getting C's.

And they did not get into medical school. It is really hard if you get C's in your pre-medical classes to get into medical school. I'm not saying it can't be done. I don't know. I'm just saying if you get A's or B pluses, it's a lot easier to get in than if you get C's and try to come up with all of these other sort of fancy tricks or excuses or whatever, extra years to try to bring up your GPA. It's complicated. If you could just be proactive and spread it out, then you can actually have the time to get the good grades.

Okay, so fine. That's strategy number one. Don't need to belabor the point. Number two is studying. Okay, what do I mean? Studying. All four of those pre-medical classes require a prolonged period of studying. If anything, I actually think this is a very helpful skill to have in becoming a physician is to have prolonged periods of mental concentration. Because when you're in the hospital, you have to have prolonged 12, 24, 30, 36-hour periods of prolonged mental concentration. And I certainly did not have that when I graduated from high school.

And it develops. And it got better over the course of undergrad. And it got even better over the course of medical school. So it's like running, you know, being a marathon runner. I mean, you sort of build up your stamina over time to have prolonged periods of concentration. And these four classes of general chemistry, organic chemistry, physics, and biology require a lot of studying with prolonged concentration. What does that mean? Don't fool yourself and say you are, quote unquote, studying when you are just sitting with a book in front of you.

And you're looking at your phone. You're staring at the wall. You're, you know, you're counting the number of dots on the acoustic tile on the ceiling. I mean, so study time is time where you are actually engaged in learning or practicing concepts that you have just learned. And because all four of those classes involve, frankly, doing a lot of sort of problem questions. There are a lot of sort of, especially in organic chemistry. It's filled with like synthesis questions where you're, you know, you're given the beginning reagents or chemicals.

And you need to figure out how you would create the sort of end chemical structure. And you've got to figure out with all the rules of organic chemistry in between how you would make that happen. And it's hard. I mean, it was hard for me. And it took a lot of just time actually doing those drills. And, you know, there's problems. You know, it's very sort of problem-based in biology. It's very problem-based in physics, you know, whether it be, you know, Newtonian mechanics or Maxwell's laws or, you know, all sorts of stuff.

Of course, with general chemistry is very sort of question or problem-based. So when you're studying, you only want to count the amount of time that you're studying as the time that you're actually doing that. So if you're sitting at your desk or you're sitting in your dorm room and you're sitting there for two hours, but only 30 minutes of those two hours are actually spent with your nose in your book or, you know, on a piece of paper writing out those chemical equations, then you only study for 30 minutes.

So you might have been sitting there for two hours, but you only studied for 30 minutes. So it's super important. And then just to benchmark yourself, I would study from, I would say, 6.30 to 10.30 every night. Well, let me, let me take that back. I would study 6.30 to 10.30 Monday through Thursday. I would take off Friday and we'll just say for the sake of argument, Saturday. That was kind of iffy. And then Sunday, I would study 1 to 5 and then 6.30 to 10.30. So I would put in eight hours on Sunday. So really Sunday was actually my hardest work day of the week after blowing off some steam on Friday night and Saturday.

So that's how much I was studying. Now, were there then, okay, were there then some times like during the day? You just have a lot of class. I just had a lot of class. You know, I had a lot of lab, right? I mean, so every single one of those classes for pre-med has a lab associated with this. I just spent a lot of time in lab every week as well. Plus, I had a lot of time just in class. I was an economics major. So just know, so that, and that's total study time. Okay, so that was all my classes. That was not just for my pre-medical classes.

So we're talking here, you know, essentially, you know, because you take the eight hours on Sunday. Let's say, you know, you break that up. That's like, and you didn't do anything on, on Wednesday. And, you know, a lot of times on Friday, before I would, you know, hang out with my friends or whatever, I'd put in a couple hours at the library on a Friday afternoon after my classes were done. So that's what I was looking at in terms of studying. Now, I was consistent with that. And I would say the key to studying is consistency because you don't want to get behind.

Because as soon as people get behind, I should say a lot of people, not all people, then they tend to get overwhelmed. And they're like, oh, I'll never catch up. And then they panic and then they don't study as hard as they should or spend as much time doing it. It tends to get worse. So the key is consistency. You want to get into a routine. You repetition, repetition, repetition. You want to get into a routine. You got to treat it like a job, like you're going to work. And it's got to come first. So I didn't, you know, quote unquote, you know, whatever word you want to use, party until my junior year of college.

So it was very structured and routine for those first two years getting done general chemistry, organic chemistry and physics of that routine. Okay. So strategy number one, you want to spread it out, spread out those pre-med classes. Strategy number two, you have to put in the time in a structured routine fashion. Okay. Now, strategy number three is to do a lot of practice questions. So oftentimes our instructors would give us practice questions. They weren't necessarily required. Some of them were required, but not all of them were.

The reason you want to do practice questions is because when you think you understand a concept, the only way to prove that you understand that concept is to test yourself by doing the practice questions. And it's, I was shocked how many times I thought I understood, I knew what I was doing with, you know, an SN1 or an E1 or an E2 or an SN2 reaction in organic chemistry. I thought I understood that. And then I did the practice questions, you know, and then, and no, you know, racemic mixture, yada, yada, yada, did not understand it.

So it's, it takes a lot of, frankly, it takes, it takes a lot of humility and it takes a lot of, and it takes a lot of hard work. You got to roll up your sleeves to actually do those practice questions. But I guarantee you that you will see questions that are almost exactly the same as the practice questions on the tests. So that happened to my institution. A lot of my friends in medical school said the same thing about their institutions because the professors only have so many hours in the day to make up questions.

So, and the concepts are very, obviously, the concepts are the same. And so a lot of times they'll just like change like very minor things about the questions. Like, oh yeah, I totally did that one, like last week. So it is super important to do those practice questions. I remember one time I, in general chemistry, my freshman year, where I had gotten an A, I got like the second highest grade in the entire class my first quarter of general chemistry. And I was so cocky that in my second quarter, I'm like, I don't, I don't need to do these practice questions.

I know general chemistry so well. And there were only two tests in the second quarter, sort of a midterm and a final. And I walked into that midterm so overconfident and ended up getting a C on the midterm. And that was the lowest grade I ever got on a pre-med test. And I was just floored. And I said to myself, I will never let this happen again. And it was because I didn't do the practice questions. I thought I understood the concepts, but I didn't test if I knew the concept by doing the practice questions. And so as a result, I mean, I would get Bs on tests quite regularly.

It was mostly A's and B's is what I got on everything. And that's what I got in all of my pre-med classes were A's and B's. It was kind of flexed. You know, I get A, B plus, A minus, B, kind of, you know, bopped around. But, you know, I got into multiple medical schools with getting A's and B's in my pre-med classes, including like highly competitive, renowned medical schools. So, like, you know, it wasn't all A's, but I wasn't getting C's either. Obviously, it's combined with MCATs, other things as well. But we're just talking about grades here in your pre-med classes.

So, the, you know, all of that put together of the three strategies of, you know, spacing it out, scheduled structured time, and doing the practice questions takes me to four. Strategy number four is it's just persistence. And I don't think there's a person out there that likes organic chemistry. And it really comes down to delayed gratification. There was this, the famous Stanford marshmallow study, I'm sure you've heard of it before, where they took kids and they put them in a room with a marshmallow. And they said, hey, if you can wait here for five minutes and not eat that marshmallow, then when I come back in, I'll give you a second marshmallow.

And they had a video and they watched the kids. And some of the kids could not wait the five minutes. They ate the marshmallow. And another group of kids could wait the five minutes. And the person came in and gave them a second marshmallow so they could eat two marshmallows. And then they followed those kids later on in life. And the kids that could wait and did not eat the marshmallow within the first five minutes, but waited, and then as a result got to eat two marshmallows. It was the kids who could delay gratification that were more successful.

Delayed gratification equals success. Perseverance equals success. And there's no simple way. There's no quick way. There's no... There's nothing that you can learn. There's no trick that overcomes that. It's just a matter of paying your dues. And so it's actually not an effective use of time to try to learn all these strategies and listen to all this advice, including this podcast. I mean, turn it off right now. If you get it, don't waste one more minute listening to this thing. Move on. Because you just got to persevere.

And that just gets down to how much do you want it? And I think that's a good lesson, too, for getting into medical school, is that it really requires the giving up of many aspects of your life. Many of my friends were partying. I was not partying. Many of my friends were playing intramural sports. I was not playing intramural sports. Many of my friends were involved in the arts or theater or what have you. I was not involved in that. When I was studying, it was a largely solid... It was solitary. I remember the only human interaction I would have was during my study breaks.

I would give myself like a 10-minute study break every two hours. And I would see people in the study lounge. But that was kind of it. It was sort of a monastic life. And are you okay with that? And if the answer is no, but the reward of getting into medical school is worth the... Not to over-dramatize it, but is it worth the pain and the suffering to get in? And for some people, the answer is no. And that's totally fine. Like, there's no judgment of that at all. For other people, it's just not... Frankly, it's just not as painful.

Because they intellectually actually really enjoy it. And I think it's on a spectrum. I mean, it's not that people either don't enjoy it at all or that they really enjoy it. And so it varies. I will tell you that I did not enjoy organic chemistry. I can't keep bringing it up. I did not enjoy organic chemistry. I thought it was awful. I did not enjoy general chemistry or organic chemistry. I really liked physics. And I liked biology. My grades were arguably a little better in both of those than in general chemistry or organic chemistry.

But I really did not like organic chemistry. Oh, I thought it was so boring. So it was difficult and boring. It's one thing if it's difficult and interesting. But it's another thing if it's difficult and boring. I mean, I would literally sit in my... And I... You know... So... So fine. You get the point. It's perseverance. It's like... You have to... Other people have said it in different ways. But you have to sort of embrace the suck. Can you... Can you embrace the suck? And do you... Do you want to? Do you have it in you? Because it's painful.

There's no other way around it. There's no way to sugarcoat it. There's no way to make it easier. It is painful. And it requires not having as much fun as other people around you. Like, it just does. It requires you not having as much fun. Are you okay with that? Alright. So the perseverance is number four. Okay. Number five. So... And this involves going to class. So I am a huge proponent of going to class. Because, again, it gives you the discipline that you need in order to put in the time and put in the effort and just show up.

I mean, when you're a doctor, when you have a job, that's just a big part of your work is just showing up every day. You got to show up at the hospital regardless of how you feel. You don't feel like going to class today. It doesn't matter. You show up. And so it gets you in this routine of showing up no matter what. Now, we had general chemistry professors freshman year who would give pop quizzes. So it was academic motivation to show up because you never knew when there was going to be a pop quiz. And the pop quiz was within the first five minutes of class.

And it was very fast. And you had to be there on time. Because if you weren't there on time and you missed the pop quiz, you got a zero on it. So that did not happen in any of my other classes except for – maybe they just did it as part of, like, freshman hazing. Who knows? But you got to show up. Once you show up in class, it's boring. I mean, I will tell you that even though I liked physics and biology, I think the physics and biology lectures themselves were actually fairly boring. The organic chemistry lectures were so boring, I literally would bite my thumb to, like, induce pain to keep me awake because I was falling asleep in class constantly.

I don't even remember a class where I wasn't falling asleep. It was so boring. So it's not a matter. It really kind of falls back onto strategy number four, which is just the perseverance. But you just got to go to class. And certainly, did I have lots of friends in medical school who did not go to class in undergrad? Absolutely. And they didn't go to class in medical school either. But they were not as necessarily as successful as other people. They did not necessarily get the residencies that they wanted to get.

They did not get the locations of the residencies they wanted to get. But, you know, by and large, I'll say the most successful people in medical school who got into the type of residencies they wanted to get into became this type of specialist they wanted to become were the ones who went to class. And they went to class in medical school because they went to class in undergrad. Obviously, there's exceptions to that. But that, you know, by and large, and I went to the University of Illinois College of Medicine, which has the largest medical school class in the country.

So I had a lot of people to look at. My sample size was fairly large. It was larger than any other medical school sample size. And that just tended to be the case. All right. Now, for all of those strategies, you're like, well, I don't want to, you know, have a year off in between undergrad and medical school. I just want to go straight through. So I don't want to do that strategy. I don't want to do the routine. I just want to study when I want to study. I don't want to have the routine of putting in the hours. I don't want to give up on fun in college.

I don't want to go to class. There are much of getting into medical school and getting good grades in your pre-med classes is doing things you don't want to do. And again, that is very consistent with what life is like as a doctor. Being a doctor is filled with doing stuff you don't want to do, like getting up in the middle of the night to either answer the phone or going to the hospital when you really don't want to. Staying up for 24 to 30 hours straight when you really don't want to. Having to cancel dinner plans or a date because you got a last-minute admit or one of your patients crashed or you had to do a lumbar puncture on somebody to rule out meningitis when you actually had dinner plans.

And you know what? You got to cancel your dinner plans. So there's a ton of stuff that being a doctor involves that, frankly, people don't want to do it because it's either tiring or it's stressful or it's inconvenient. Frankly, it causes damage to relationships with other people because you can't be there for them, whether they be friends or family members. So that practice of doing stuff that you don't want to do is actually, I think, actually pretty good preparation for medical school and residency and being a doctor.

And listen, it's not all doom and gloom. You got to make lemonade out of lemons. And you got to find a way to laugh through your day and make jokes and whistle while you work and still have a good attitude and be positive and have fun. But that's got to come from inside. It can't be from the outside. It's got to come from the inside. And with that, I will end this episode of the How to Get Into Medical School podcast. This is Dr. Eric Bricker..

