Title: How to Sell in Healthcare PODCAST Episode 5 - Large Market Prospecting and Sales_TgvQOKic8Gk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgvQOKic8Gk
Language: en
Duration: 37:14
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker with A Healthcare Z, and this is the How to Sell in Healthcare podcast. In today's episode, we will be discussing how to sell to the large market for employee benefit solutions. And by large market, I mean employers that are greater than 2,000 employees, oftentimes 2,000 to 10,000 is kind of considered a large market, and greater than 10,000 or sometimes greater than 50,000 employees is considered jumbo. But I'm going to put the two of them together and say a lot of these approaches can be used for sort of all these types of employers that have greater than 2,000 employees.

And it's important to remember that the number of organizations really do stratify. In other words, that the number of organizations with greater than 2,000 employees is actually far fewer than the number of organizations with less than 2,000 employees. And you can go to the Department of Labor statistics where you can see how stratified or how distributed it is. So while greater than 50% of the U.S. workforce works at these larger companies, they do represent a smaller number of individual organizations.

And that's going to impact sort of how we approach them. And we're going to start off similar to what we did for the small group and mid-market. And then we're going to start off with prospecting and then move to the initial meeting. So the way that you prospect and have initial introductions to the large group market segment is different than mid-market and small group. So for large market prospecting, it is going to be, for the most part, direct. And it's not going to be through a broker or benefit consultant.

Now, of course, these large employers do use brokers and benefits consultants. However, the relationship between those brokers and benefits consultants is different for a number of reasons. Okay. Reason number one, once you get to a larger company, now remember, an organization typically spends about $10,000 per employee on the health plan every year. So for 100 employees, that's $1 million. For 1,000 employees, that's $10 million. So we're talking, for 2,000 employees, we're talking at least $20 million of spend.

And if you have 10,000 employees, then you're spending $100 million every year on health care. So that means that the employer, because it's such a large expense, they're going to have a larger number of people within the organization itself that have the expertise to go through the procurement process for getting these vendors and much more expertise in managing their own employee health plan. And they oftentimes will use their broker or consultant. They will use their advice. They will use them on a project basis.

They will use them to do due diligence on various vendors or solutions, et cetera. But the relationship is different. Okay. What are some other ways that the relationship is different? So, okay. So one, the relationship is different because there's just more people and more skill and more experience and more acumen by the employer itself. Okay. So typically, you're going to have a VP of HR who's looking over this huge organization. Then you're going to have somebody who, frankly, might be a VP of benefits or a director of comp and benefits.

Or sometimes it's referred to as a VP or a director of total rewards. And so there's oftentimes a significant compensation component in addition to their benefits component. And the benefits component includes a fairly significant 401k component, a quote unquote financial benefit, not a health related benefit. So they have a lot of responsibilities. And again, just to point to the fact that they have a lot of skill dedicated in that area. They might have dedicated employee health plan strategists and employee health plan analysts and managers, et cetera.

So there's much more of a hierarchy even just within employee benefits because they're much larger organizations. I mean, some of these organizations are literally doing 500 million, sometimes a billion dollars a year in healthcare spend for the largest of the large, whether it be state organizations or big, you know, fortune 10 employers. Now, the other way that it's different is the typically the consultant or the broker that they're using is oftentimes paid differently. So that broker consultant is oftentimes either their fee arrangement is a little different and it can be one, it could be on a retainer.

So they're paying, let's say, a monthly amount to keep that broker consultant on a retainer or two, it's project based. So they will define a project and it could be like, let's say, an actuarial project that they want assistance on, et cetera. And so they pay that consultant or broker on a project basis. Now, with that in mind, the brokers and consultants still, and this is a controversial area, but I'm still going to go there. They are still, and this is, this has been anecdotal through many people that I have spoken with over the past 12 plus years in employee benefits and health insurance is that there are still quote unquote override payments by the major health insurance carriers to benefits consultants.

And you have to look, and there are override payments by the pharmacy benefits managers to the benefits consultants and the brokers as well. And you have to look really closely at your, at the employer's contract between their broker or consultant over what fees they do or do not need to disclose and the way that they structure those, those payments from those outside entities as well. So in other words, if they have those payments through, let's say a wholly owned subsidiary, that would be a quote unquote separate company that has a different profit and loss.

And so the consultant that the employer have might be part of one quote unquote subsidiary within that company, but then the, um, and they don't even call them override payments, right? What they, they will call them marketing bonuses or loyalty bonuses. I mean, there's all sorts of different names for these things, but the point is, is that there are, that there's money paid by the vendors directly to the broker or consultants. And those need to be, um, disclosed. Sometimes contractually required to be disclosed by the employer, but not always.

So that, you know, that sort of, you know, payment, not from the employer to the consultant aside, let's just talk about payment to the, the, the broker or consultant directly from the employer. Okay. So the, um, the things that are different about the relationship is one is that there's more expertise on the employer side too, that the way that the, um, the broker or consultant is being paid is different, uh, for large group as, as well. And really, I would say the sort of, uh, third aspect that you need to be aware of is that the broker or consultant is still part of the buying team.

So you, when you think of the, the buying team or the buying group, um, then the broker consultant are still absolutely a part of it. Uh, and they definitely have influence and they also needed to be, they also need to be persuaded. But whereas with the small and the mid group, you go to the broker consultant first and persuade them first, and then they bring the employer along that oftentimes in the large market that you want to go directly to the employer and the employer will then bring the broker or consultant along.

And if it's a very successful relationship and you can actually make the broker consultant look very smart and have it be a very well-run implementation and have it be a well, very well-run program. And that broker consultant, after, after they see that with one or several of their clients or within their office or within their practice, they will then spread that across other groups that they, that, that you did not directly go to, but rather the consultant was like, Hey, this very large, uh, company used, uh, this particular vendor.

It would be good for this other completely unrelated company to also, to use that vendor as well. So you want to also from a, uh, a, a, a referral standpoint, you also want to have a positive relationship with that, uh, that broker or consultant on the large group as well. Okay. Now in prospecting for small and mid market, we talked about making lists of brokers and consultants based upon, uh, LinkedIn, and you're going to do the same thing for large group, except in this case, what you're going to do is when you're starting the list, you're going to need to have company names.

Now this is where it's fairly easy on the internet to look at lists of large companies. I mean, it's just, I mean, you can just start with like the fortune 500 or the fortune 1000, and you can go through and through a LinkedIn search by looking at, by looking those organizations up and then searching for a title like, um, VP of HR and VP of benefits or VP of total rewards or, uh, or director of benefits or benefits manager. And within that, um, bureaucracy or hierarchy within HR at these very large organizations, then you want to, you don't just want to have like one target person.

You want to, you want to sort of, uh, you want to prospect across a range of these people because there are some VPs of HR that came from the benefit side of the business and they know benefits super well. And there are some VPs of HR that know almost nothing about benefits because they did not come from that side of HR. So, but, but you don't know there's a, again, a priori, you don't always know in advance which VPs of HR do or do not have that type of understanding or expertise. Um, likewise, when you get to the, uh, the director or the VP of total awards or comp and benefits, they might be a compensation person.

Not really. I mean, yes, they do health insurance and it's, it's actually from a, from a P and L perspective, it's actually a greater responsibility, but they're really a compensation person first. And so they really lean on their quote unquote benefits manager underneath them. So maybe in that situation, it's actually the benefits manager that you want to be prospecting most heavily. But again, you don't know. So you want to do starting from the bottom, work your way up. You want benefits analyst, benefits manager, director of comp and benefits, VP of HR, all within that organization.

And sometimes you even want to do the C E C O O or the C F O depending upon who the head of HR reports to. And for a lot of these, they, you know, they, they, um, they call them the CHRO, the chief human resource officer. And a lot of times that CHRO reports into the CEO. And, you know, frankly, at these organizations, because they're so big, you're never going to get to the CHRO and you're certainly never going to get to the CEO. And so actually trying to target lower down within the, uh, HR and benefits bureaucracy is actually a more effective way to go about it.

So you're going to need to spend a lot of time. So again, I would, I would spend like two hours every morning from five to seven with these large employers, uh, targeting them. Okay. And then again, you're going to do outreach by email and phone. And again, you're going to do probably a total of 12 outreaches. You're going to do like seven emails and five phone calls. Again, you're just going to leave voicemails and you're going to have to do some detective work to get to their phone number. And you're not going to have their direct phone number.

You're basically going to end up having to call through the phone tree at the company. And this is where Aaron Ross actually has a lot of great information about those initial phone calls. Because what you do is you kind of play, there's this old detective TV show called Columbo, and you want to kind of try to play Columbo when you call the company and be like, you know, Hey, I, I work in a company that, you know, provides employee benefits, you know, services. And, you know, frankly, there's, there's a person within your organization that would probably be really interested in, um, learning about the service that we provide and other clients that are like them who found a ton of value.

But, you know, but, but I don't know who that person is within your organization. Who's the right person to really contact? So you're not trying, whoever you get on the phone, you're not trying to sell to them, which you're really trying to do with that person you get on the phone is, is to be like, Hey, who's the right person at your organization that would find value in the type of solution I'm talking about. And that's the same way you want to go about your emails as well, too, with your emails, the call to action is not necessarily even, you know, Hey, can you get on a five minute phone call with me like we did in the small group and mid market? It's, Hey, could you, um, could you afford this email to the person within your organization who you think would really be the best person for this email? And, you know, could you CC me on it? That would be great.

And sometimes they'll forward it to that person without CCing you. And then you'll just hear a roundabout from somebody else that you never even knew existed, or sometimes they will CC you on it. But that's the, so the call to action is a little different, right? You really need to do some exploring within the organization and you're going to use your CRM then because within one quote unquote, um, uh, it's called an account within Salesforce.com within one account. And that's going to be like the company name.

So the account is going to be like Walmart or the account is going to be like, um, American airlines, or the account is going to be like Kroger grocery stores. And you're going to, uh, have different contacts. Again, in Salesforce, that's what they call them different contacts within that account. And so what you're going to do is you're going to need to map out within that account who all those different contacts are and who really has responsibility. And there's a note section within is that if you're going to have, they probably won't take your call.

So you have to understand, and listen, if you were in their shoes, you wouldn't take the call either. Cause you're, I mean, you're getting every Yahoo on the planet contacting you. You don't know what's real. You don't know what's not. You can totally waste all of your time talking to all these people without ever getting your actual job done. So the fact that they don't talk to you is to be expected. So there's only a few ways to get around that. One is through persistence. Two is through voicemails. Okay. And then three is through this sort of detective method to get to the person who actually cares within the organization about what it is that you have to talk about.

So the yield might actually be like 200 people that you're contacting gets you down to 10, five minute phone calls, which gets you down to one 30 minute phone call. So just know that you're going to have to cast your net really wide and have the top of your funnel be really broad for these large groups because they have people calling on them constantly. It's highly competitive to get their attention, which brings me to the next point about large group prospecting. And that is, as we talked about in earlier podcasts, there's sort of two types of, you know, marketing can be broken down into two categories.

It can be inbound marketing and outbound marketing. And everything that we've talked about so far in regards to marketing has been outbound marketing, interruption-based marketing. Now for the large group, inbound marketing is actually effective to a certain extent. I would say in the small market and mid-market, inbound marketing is not as effective and inbound marketing only works. Inbound marketing is another way of saying content marketing. It's basically another way of saying creating content that is not sales.

It is of educational value to whoever is seeking that value. And it does not involve any sales at all. You do not sell. And it involves blogs. It involves videos. It involves podcasts. But it does not sell at all. It is strictly educational. And we had a, you know, your company should have a blog. You're, you know, you even as an individual salesperson could have a blog where you do not sell. All you do is create valuable educational content for the end user. And so I wrote a blog every week for 10 years. So 52 weeks a year times 10 years, I wrote 520 blog posts, almost without fail.

I probably did 50 a year. There's probably a couple of weeks where, and I would post a rerun during a holiday week or what have you. So that blog helps for a number of reasons. One is because they, the people who are doing inbound marketing, you're going to basically be found not by interruption, but by search. So people are going to, and so it's really through SEO. So this is where you're going to want to do at some degree of SEO search engine optimization for your blog. And it's not hard. There's like a zillion videos on YouTube about it.

But the key to SEO is not so much the keywords. It's that the content is valuable and it's frequent. So I wrote my blog weekly, and that was frankly on the low end. Many content providers say that you should actually be creating content daily. Some content creators say you should be creating multiple pieces of content a day and, um, or at least multiple times a week. So if you want to be found, you need to create a lot of content and you need to create a lot of valuable content. So what is it that you know that a lot of other people don't know that they would find helpful? And I guarantee you, there are gobs of things that you know that people in HR, employee benefits, yada, yada, yada, brokers, benefit consultants, tons of things that you don't know, that they don't know that you know.

And if you don't know those things yourselves, then you start interviewing people, right? You know, you start having a, you know, a Q and a, um, you interview somebody on a podcast. There's many folks that go about that method of bringing expertise and value to people by interviewing subject matter experts. Okay. So the, um, the inbound marketing, uh, let me tell you a story. We had a 14,000 employee company in the Midwest that we landed as a client. It was worth over half a million, well over half a million dollars a year in revenue that they contacted us because of the blog.

And we would have never, they weren't even on our prospecting radar. Like they should have been like, I should have been blowing out of these people. And these people went after us because they were like, look, this content on this blog is like exactly. I have talked with, I've had initial calls and we have had sales with very large organizations in America because they contacted us from the content that we did on our blog. And we also, then we also did monthly educational webinars. Okay. And for the blog and for the webinars, you're also going to want to send this out, um, uh, to all of your existing clients.

And you're also going to want to send it to out to all of your existing relationships with your, uh, brokers and consultants. And basically everybody knows. So you create like a newsletter. You're like, Hey, here's my weekly blog. And you're going to email it out to them. And you're just going to email them like a link to your blog. Okay. And likewise for our monthly educational webinars, we would email out invitations to all our existing clients and our existing broker and consultants and prospective brokers and consultants, prospective folks.

And we would get like 200 people a month on our webinars and we would have, we wouldn't even be able to get, we would be prospecting with brokers and consultants and with large employers. And we would not be able to get any response from our prospecting, but they would get on our webinars. And, and this takes, it takes time. And so that 14,000 employee company in the Midwest had been, uh, reading our blog for over a year before they reached out. So this is not a quick thing. I would say that in general, the sales cycle for the large group, large group, large market is over a year.

Oftentimes it's multi year, but you got to get started somewhere. If you want to close a large group sale in two years, you got to get started. Now you can't get started in two years, but when you're doing your sales projections, don't expect those guys to close. And we'll talk about seasonality and employee benefits in the next, um, episode of the, uh, podcast, but it is very long sales cycles for the, for the large group. And you want to use inbound and outbound lead generation or marketing or whatever you want to call it.

And marketing in business to business is essentially lead generation. That's all, that's, that's the sole purpose of marketing is to generate leads for the sales team. Okay. So again, similar to Aaron Ross, we separated out, um, prospecting outbound prospecting to large group from, uh, sales for large group. So we still had the prospecting team do the, um, do the prospecting. Okay. And they would do, they would keep track of the emails and they would leave the voicemails. And for the, now for the five minute phone call for the large group, we would go straight to the subject matter expert, to the SME, which would either be me or it would be one of the salespeople or would be one of our people from operations.

But five, I mean, five minutes with one of these large group contacts is like gold. Again, it's going to take you potentially 200, um, people that you're outreaching to just to get 10 of those calls. So those calls are super value, super valuable. And the types of companies that will actually take your prospecting calls and want to talk to you are not necessarily even in interested in buying from you. Okay. This is super early in the quote unquote dating process. They're not even interested in buying from you.

What they're interested, what they have is a problem or a perceived problem. And frankly, they just want to learn more about it. They're like, look, I got this problem. And oftentimes it's a problem that has been brought to them because what causes problems within organizations is oftentimes people don't oftentimes proactively identify the problems. It's because somebody else, typically their boss has identified the problem and they've made it their problem. So it's typically, it's embarrassment, it's seniority, it's peer pressure, it's all these things.

And, and that is from, by the way, this is not an Eric Bricker theory here. That is from the book. Hope is not a strategy from an incredibly senior Dun & Bradstreet, a corporate salesperson who is incredibly successful. And it's really, what you're, what you're probing for with that prospecting is the pain of embarrassment and, and potentially being fired or looking bad or not getting a promotion. Cause that's going to ignite the fire underneath them to actually want to talk to you. Okay. So if somebody, they're not bored.

Okay. They're not, not, they're not, not busy. Okay. They are, they are busy. They are not bored. They got a lot going on. So just the fact that they get on the phone with you for five minutes means they've got some sort of problem. Okay. Now it also means too, that they are an, or likely an early adopter. So not everybody that has a problem is an early adopter, but the people that go, right. And this gets to, we'll talk about this in another episode too. This gets to the, the Jeffrey Moore technology adoption life cycle of early adopters, pragmatists, conservatives, and skeptics in terms of sort of the way that people adopt new disruptive solutions.

And so the people that will take your five minute call typically fall into the early adopter and the pragmatist category. And there's at least twice as many pragmatists for every one early adopter. And you can tell the difference between a pragmatist and early adopter is because a pragmatist has a problem, but is not super excited about solving it. Like they'll solve it because, you know, for CYA or because they have to, or because of peer pressure and they see other people in other organizations solving this problem, but it's really the early adopters that really see the problem and are actually excited to solve it for a number of reasons.

I, that we worked with one highly successful HR executive who is an HR executive at a incredibly multi tens of thousands of employee company. And we worked with her at several companies before, and she was an early adopter because she was really a go-getter and she wanted to work her way up the corporate ladder. And so she knew to work her way up the corporate ladder that she had to have these wins that she wanted to be a problem solver. And she wanted to go into these organizations and she, and you know, whether it was a turnaround or whatever, but she wasn't looking to hide and just not get fired.

She was looking to, to make a splash and really make some improvements and gain notoriety and recognition within that organization so that she could then springboard that to another job at another organization that was even higher. And she totally successfully executed that over like 10 years. Like I saw her do this to the point now, like I said, she is incredibly successful and she was an early adopter. Like, I don't think she, you know, drove a Tesla in 2012. Like, I don't necessarily think she is just like into like cool technology, but she was an early adopter because she, she was highly ambitious and saw adopting new solutions as a way for her to achieve her ambition.

Okay. Different people are early adopters for other reasons. We had another person who was an early adopter because she just loved benefits. I mean, she's literally said that at the first in-person meeting that I had with her. She's like, she's been working at benefits for like 35 years. I mean, it's unreal. And she's like, listen, I love benefits. I love it. And oftentimes you can find because they're on like the boards of the local business group on health, et cetera, et cetera. They do, they speak, they're national speakers.

So those early adopters. Now the problem is, is that the early adopters are a lot of times they are even more popular. Like I said, because these people, they do, uh, they do national speaking or local speaking, or they're on the boards of directors of these business group on health. And so every company, every vendor and their brother is trying to get in front of these people. So you think it's hard to get in front of a, of a, of a corporate HR benefits person. It's even harder to get in front of these, um, you know, quote unquote, early adopter type folks.

So you're going to, the, what I was trying to get to is that when you have these five minute phone calls, you're not going to have the prospecting team do the five minute phone call. You're going to have the prospecting team contact the SME and you're going to be like, Hey SME. And you're going to have to have this relationship up front or this expectation up front set that, Hey SME, I've got a call. And you know, you, the prospector and the company are going to have to pick the time next Tuesday at 8am.

And you're going to call up the SME and be like, SME, I gotta have you on Tuesday at eight. And again, you have to have the relationship with the SME's boss to be such that that SME is going to drop whatever else they're doing to make being on that call with you because the company is going to be totally turned off if they don't have a high degree of expertise immediately on the phone with them. Okay. So that is another difference in terms of how you're going to be cultivating these leads that is different for large group than from small group and mid market.

Okay. So you get the SME on the five minute phone call. And again, you're going to have the call to action be, I want to have a 30, you know, the next step is to do a 30 minute, you know, more of a deep dive. And you can even say, you know, at that point, a lot of companies like to bring it, you know, cause oftentimes the five minute phone calls, it's going to be with one person. And it's good to say, Hey, look, a lot of times for that 30 minute call, a lot of times people with, you know, want to invite their colleagues within the organization.

Sometimes it's one other person. Sometimes it's a couple other people. Sometimes they even want to bring their broker or consultant in on that phone call. So I'll, you know, say, I'll leave it up to you, whatever you want to do, because sometimes the employer is very hands-off with their broker and consultant. And it's really the employer that's driving the ship and they're driving the bus. And other times they actually like to bring in their consultant early because they, they really do have, the consultant really does have a lot more sway.

There's listen, there's a lot of very large organizations where the consultant has been the consultant with the HR department longer than any employee in the HR department. There are many companies where that benefits consultant, like has a badge for the company. They can just swipe in and get through security. And they've been with that company consulting with them for like 10 years. And the most senior executive in HR has only been there for like four. That totally happens. And so, but you don't know when that happens.

So you don't want to overstep your bounds. They look a lot of times they're going to want to bring, you know, a couple of colleagues on the phone. Maybe you want to bring your consultant in. I'll leave that up to you. And then you're going to have that 30 minute phone call again on that 30 minute call. You're going to have the SME and your salesperson. So because they have a larger, more complex buying team at the employer, then you in, and as far as selling goes are going to need to have a more complex team on your side as well.

And by more complex, I mean, it could be as small, I mean, at Compass, we had like the SME and the salesperson. It was a team of two. And then as we went further along in the sales process, we would bring in the account management folks so that they were part of that so that it wasn't just like, Oh, we're, Hey, we're, it's sold now. Here are these brand new people that you've never met before. So we would incorporate those account management people on some of the later sales calls as well. And of course the salespeople would stay on the implementation calls as well too, to make sure that, you know, it wasn't just like a handoff, but it was a transition over oftentimes multiple months.

Okay. So the, and the reason that you need the salesperson in addition to the SME and the relationship between the salesperson and the SME there, um, and this is just how we did it. Not everybody has to do it this way. Is that look, especially in the beginning, the SME being the subject matter expert is still going to do the majority of the talking. Like they're going to do the entire 30 minute presentation. They might do subsequent presentations. And what the, what the, um, what the salesperson needs to do is they need to ensure the followup between each of those calls and each of those meetings, because the calls in the subsequent calls and meetings don't happen unless the salesperson is constantly pushing on that.

And the SME is not, it's not their job to do that. That's the salesperson's job to do that. Okay. What else is the salesperson doing? There are probably, you know, during that, maybe during the five minute call, but definitely doing that 30 minute call, there might be specific needs that come up related to the company that you're going to want to corral additional SMEs. It might be a technology SME within your company, or it might be a, a lot of times, and this is where our account management team was super helpful.

It's because it was the account management team that was really the employee engagement experts because they were in charge of, um, getting utilization of the program after the program was in place. So they would have communication challenges within their employer. So we would bring the account management people and we had an employee engagement, uh, playbook. And we had case studies of employee engagement about how different employee engagement strategies worked in different types of employers. And that was actually incredibly helpful during the sales process, especially during objection handling, when their objection would be like, oh, well, we can't communicate to our employees for X, Y, Z reason.

And we would bring in the account management speeds, not to talk about things in theory, but to talk about actual case examples of how we had used various communication strategies to reach, you know, disparate types of employee populations. And it's the, it's the job of the salesperson to internally make that happen within your organization to get the right people sort of on the right calls and at the right meetings at the same time. That initial SME, that's not their job to do that. So sort of the quarterback of the sales process of the quote unquote sales team for the large group sales is the sales person.

So at that point, the prospect is probably not involved because they just got the, because it's a ton of work for the, for the, to, just to get the initial SME on that five minute phone call. Like that is a ton of work and they should be totally, we had a variable compensation and we would pay them based upon the number of five minute phone calls that they could get set up. And they would do the five minute phone calls for small and mid market, but, but even if they had the SME on the five minute phone call for the large group, we'd still pay for it.

It was totally valuable. Okay. So that gets us to the 30 minute meeting. And I have not described the 30 minute meeting in detail, but you're still going to have that slide deck that you used for small and mid market. Okay. I would argue that you can use the same slide deck for small and mid market, and you're going to do some tweaks to that slide deck for the large market. I don't think you need to have a completely different set slide deck between the small mid group slide deck and the large group mid, uh, slide deck.

But I do think the slide deck and the talk track needs to be somewhat different. Okay. What's a specific example of that? Okay. It's important to like, we talked about this in previous, uh, podcast. It's important to incorporate stories in your, uh, 30 minute pitch or presentation. Okay. Those stories for large group need to be large group stories. If you tell a story about a group with 75 employees to a company that has 15,000, then that story, listen, that story could be completely appropriate and accurate for that 15,000 employee company.

But oftentimes people are just looking for reasons to say no. And just, just the fact that your case study or your example was for a 75 employee company and they're 15,000. Then they'll say, yeah, but listen, we're a 15,000 company. You don't know us, right? That's one of the classic things that large employers say is literally every single one of them that I've ever talked to says we're special. We're different. We're unique. Yes, but they're not us. We do things differently here. And listen, a lot of times they do not always.

A lot of times they think they do things differently, but in fact, they really don't, but you need to be able. And so, you know, when you talk about whether it's existing clients for references or you talk about industries or you talk about, like I said, examples, those need to be geared towards. And then also, if you're, let's say you're talking about employee communication, the way that you have an employee communication strategy for a small company versus mid-market company versus a large employer, also totally different.

You would never use a small group communication strategy with a large employer. So that small group communication strategy that maybe you used in your small group slide deck, mid-market slide deck, you are not going to use that. Let me give you an example. In-person open enrollment meetings. Very large employers do it almost exclusively online. Maybe they do some webinars. Maybe they'll do a handful of in-person benefit meetings just for executives. But do not talk about in-person open enrollment meetings for these very large companies.

They're just going to be like, what are you talking about? We have 75,000 employees literally in all 50 states. There is no way we do in-person employee benefit meetings. Whereas for a small, medium-sized group, if you don't have some way of addressing the in-person employee benefit meetings, they're like, look, that's the central part of how we discuss our benefits at our company. It's part of our culture. So with that, I will pause around large group prospecting in sales. And thank you so much for giving me the most important thing that you have, which is your time and attention.

And again, this is Dr. Eric Bricker with A Healthcare Z. Thank you so much for listening to the How to Sell in Healthcare podcast..

