Title: How to Sell in Healthcare During Pandemic_Eh0YfAKohz0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eh0YfAKohz0
Language: en
Duration: 8:53
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is how to sell in healthcare during a pandemic. So I wanted to bring you some very practical information given the incredibly difficult situation that we're in as a country and especially if your job is to like sell in healthcare, whether you're a broker or benefits consultant or in some other capacity within healthcare, it's like, look, you still need to sell, you still need to get new business. How in the world are we supposed to do this? Well, I will tell you that at Compass, we started and I started selling during the Great Recession of 2008, 2009 and in the early years after that and we were able to achieve a lot of growth and I'm going to tell you about some of the things that I learned in that process.

Now keep in mind, okay, so it was a recession, which is what we have now during the pandemic. Of course, I've never sold in the pandemic before, but I had a similar situation in that I did most of my sales remote and by sales, I mean, we're talking like at least 300 to 400 clients during like this three to four year period and it was, um, it was groups as big as like 6,000 lives, 8,000 lives, totally remote. Okay. For a variety of reasons. Like one of which was in the early days, we didn't have enough money like to get on a plane.

Like I would drive to Houston and back, it's like 10 hours round trip so that we didn't have to spend money on the Southwest Airlines flight. Okay. So did a lot of this remotely and not face to face, which is what a lot of us are going to have to do given the, um, the office setups with coronavirus. Okay. So of course we talk about this, you got to talk about sales funnels. Okay. You got to know about funnels, right? Okay. So now let's take this funnel. We're going to do a little three dimensional, uh, geometry in our heads and we're going to turn it on its end.

So like we're looking at like the circular top, we're looking like down the funnel and that's what this is. And we're going to talk about how what you put in the top of the funnel is incredibly important. And we're going to talk about A, B, and C in terms of what you put in the funnel and what I learned over the years to be successful. So A segmentation, it needs to be small and medium sized businesses. Everyone loves to go for the big enterprises, but for a variety of reasons, the incumbents always, always win and they're incredibly slow.

So small and medium sized businesses are much faster in terms of the decision-making process. And you're, as a salesperson, you're going to be able to get in much closer to the top in a smaller or medium sized business. And by medium sized business, I'll say like a hundred to even like 2000 employees, right? So you're talking up to 4,000, uh, lives on that. So you could, and we even, like I said, I was doing like 8,000 life groups, like totally remote. Okay. So, okay. So one, if you're going to try to, you know, sell to big enterprises in this environment, like good luck, maybe you could do that.

I certainly could not. Okay. HR and CFO. Okay, fine. HR CFO, you're selling, you know, insurance benefits, related things. That makes sense, right? But here's the key with a long tenure at their companies by long tenure. I mean, like, um, I sold, uh, remotely to a retail head of HR, big retail, thousands of employees. She had worked there for 25 years. Okay. Another company in the hospitality industry, they had like 16,000 employees. The woman who was the head of benefits, she'd been there for 14 years. Okay. Why is that tenure so important? Because these people are going to be your champions within the company and they need to have credibility.

And because they had been there for so long and they've established so many relationships and they had established their competency, they had so much credibility. And then two, they also tended to have less fear. Okay. Their fear wasn't totally gone, which is completely rational, but they tended to have less fear than the new people. I told the story about what these retail and hospitality companies did to somebody who had been the head of, uh, benefits, director of benefits for another very large retailer, luxury retailer.

He'd only been there for two years. I tell him the story about how much money they saved using compass and the first words out of his mouth were, that is job security. Because that's the first thing that's on his mind. Okay. So one, small means of businesses. Two, people that have long tenures that you're calling on. Three. Okay. There are people that are, have long tenures at these companies who are just stodgy and conservative and they are just not going to do anything new. Okay. You don't want to do those people because you as a salesperson, by definition, you're doing something new.

So you got to find people that are early adopters. And typically these people who work in benefits and healthcare that are early adopters are typically mad as heck and they're not going to take it anymore. And it's typically because of either something that happened in their personal lives or something that happened to an employee that was health related or just somebody got sick and they just had that, that awful healthcare experience where they just got lost in the system and it cost a gazillion dollars and the quality was bad and the outcomes were bad.

I mean, we had another person at a sort of a high tech manufacturer where one of the employees, fairly high level employee died of cancer and it was like awful. It was like awful for that person. It was awful for the company. And so their head of benefits was like, I'm mad as heck. I'm not going to take it anymore. And he started adopting all these new things. Okay. So fine. So you're like, okay, so that's the top of the funnel. These are the people that we really want to focus on, right? Small, medium sized businesses, HR CFO with long tenures or also early adopters.

Okay. The next question goes, how in the world do you find these people? One of the best sales books I can ever recommend is by a gentleman named Aaron Ross called Predictable Revenue. And he says, look, as a salesperson, his biggest problem wasn't like the sales pitch. It was like finding the people. How do you find these people? And so in this day and age, I think where you find people is on Facebook, is it on Google and it's on YouTube. Like that's where you find people. Okay. Even for business to business, even for business to business.

Okay. Now I'm going to tell you something about, about, call it a Facebook lookalike audience. Okay. Now this is remarkable. Facebook lookalike audiences are remarkable. You can enter in, um, about a hundred email addresses and phone numbers of people that you want to target, but you don't actually want to target them. You just want to target people that are like them. So you can enter in those hundred email addresses and phone numbers and you can say, hey, Facebook machine learning, can you find me hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands of people that essentially resemble this audience of a hundred email addresses that I just sent you? And guess what? Facebook will do that.

So guess what you need to do? You need to assemble your Rolodex of email addresses and they don't have to be all their personal email addresses, right? There's a lot of people that probably use their work email address for their Facebook account. Okay. And you probably have a lot of cell phone numbers for these people. You might have some personal email addresses for these people. And okay. So really from what I've read to be effective, you have to have about a hundred of these and the match rate is never a hundred percent.

So you might need 120 or 150 of these things to actually get up to a hundred matches, right? Within Facebook. And then Facebook is going to go out and it's going to find a similar audience. So who knows, you know, many marketers know that Facebook, Facebook's algorithms know people better than they know themselves. Okay. So what do these people have in common? Who knows? Maybe they're all left-handed. Maybe they all scratch the right side of their head. Who knows? But Facebook knows. Okay. What else does Facebook know? Facebook also knows the web browsing history of these people.

Because it's something called the Facebook pixel. Where on the websites that most people or many people go to, it has a pixel on there that tells your Facebook account that you've been to that website. Which is why if you're like looking at canoes and then all of a sudden you go to Facebook, there's an ad for a canoe. That's the Facebook pixel at work. Okay. So, maybe they all, you know, read hours and hours of employee benefit news. I don't know. But the point is that Facebook knows. And then you can generate lead ads where you can advertise to them with awesome, amazing, educational content, probably in video form.

And if they want to learn more, then within Facebook you can just ask them to put in their email address. It could be their work email address. And you can collect that and then you can follow up with them. So, in this day and age, it's not about the old ways of finding people. Now, I have not done this. I can't say that I have done this. I don't call on HR and CFO. I don't sell employee benefits. I have not done this. Okay. But it seems like an interesting idea. And I wanted to share it with you today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

