Title: How Doctor Relative Value Units _RVUs_ Work - Secret to How Doctors Get Paid_mFlafz-wTro
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mFlafz-wTro
Language: en
Duration: 4:43
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing relative value units, or what are commonly referred to as RVUs. So most people in employee benefits and even in healthcare have not even heard an RVU before, but these are super important and frankly we're going to go down a little bit of a rabbit hole, so hold on to your hats. So RVUs, as point number one says here, is actually the way that physician works gets measured in terms of the amount of work, like how much work is an office visit that is 15 minutes versus an office visit that is 45 minutes versus an upper endoscopy versus a gallbladder surgery versus an emergency room visit.

All of these different physician services have to be measured in terms of the amount of work and that is actually done through the system of RVUs and the system was actually created back in the early 1990s and it is used by Medicare and so almost by default is then used by commercial insurance plans as well. And so it is tied to the CPT code, right? So I have a previous video where I talk about coding and every single procedure, office visit, etc. has a five-digit CPT code and then that five-digit CPT code is then tied to a specific number of RVUs.

So a new patient office visit that is of, you know, sort of medium or lighter intensity is a 99202 and that has an RVU count of 1.73 RVUs. Okay, wonderful. Now how do we translate that into dollars? Okay, Medicare pays about $37 per RVU. Now Medicare is kind of constantly changing or tweaking its reimbursement per RVU. So that's approximate. Okay, now commercial insurance plans reimburse higher than Medicare for RVUs. And as you can see here, it can range from anywhere from 55 to $70 per RVU. And that $70 per RVU tends to be higher on the procedure side.

And so this is where quote-unquote proceduralists, whether it be surgeons or interventional cardiologists or gastroenterologists, these proceduralists tend to be compensated in general, not always, in general more per RVU. There's somewhat higher compensation for radiologists and their RVUs as well, but that's a controversial topic. We won't get into that today. Okay, next up, where in the world do these RVUs come from? Well, if there is anything like a secret committee or a not-so-secret secret committee, it is RUC, which is the Relative Value Scale Upgate Committee.

It is run by the American Medical Association. It has representatives from all the different medical specialties. And there's literally a doctor from each of the different specialties. And they get around a big table and they take in survey data from ophthalmologists and dermatologists and ear, nose and throat doctors to say, hey, how long does it take you to do XYZ procedure? And they take that survey data in and then they do a series of votes where they then vote on how many RVUs are assigned to the CPT codes.

The RUC is a private committee. It is, again, run by the American, or organized by the American Medical Association. It gives recommendations to Medicare. Medicare almost always just takes those recommendations. And it's that handoff between RUC and Medicare that actually is highly politicized. And so different administrations in their relationship with the AMA have various degrees of threats, positive relationship, not so positive relationship with RUC as it relates to how they're going to reimburse Medicare based upon those RVUs.

And as goes Medicare, so does the commercial insurance plus X number of dollars. So let me just pause there and close by saying that physicians have their group meetings typically at night where they talk amongst their partners. There oftentimes tends to be a lot of, like, they measure, RVUs. And each physician knows how many RVUs they have billed for during the previous week, month, quarter, etc. And all the physicians will talk about how many RVUs each one of them is doing and then how much they're getting paid.

And as you can imagine, those can be fairly confrontational, high temperature meetings. So just know that the RVU is a three letter acronym that is highly on the mind of physicians. And I won't go any further than that today. We could literally spend hours and hours on RVUs, but I will pause there. And thank you so much for watching A Healthcare Z..

