Title: How to Sell in Healthcare PODCAST Ep 9 How to Sell During COVID Pandemic_u-isJaxjBOg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u-isJaxjBOg
Language: en
Duration: 24:36
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker from A Healthcare Z, and this is the How to Sell in Healthcare podcast. Today's episode is how to sell during the COVID pandemic. Now, of course, none of us have ever sold in a pandemic before. I have never sold in a pandemic before. So how in the world are we going to take our previous sales experience and apply that to the current sales environment of the pandemic? And here's how. I don't know how to sell in a pandemic, but I do know how to sell remotely. And if there is anything that has changed the dynamic of sales during coronavirus, it is that business-to-business sales, complex business-to-business sales, has become remote sales.

It has become telephonic sales. The in-person component of sales has been taken away largely. Okay, what does that mean? There are some profound implications of this. And I had a ton of telephonic B2B sales experience in employee benefits at Compass because I had three young children and a spouse in a city where we had no extended family. So we didn't really have the sort of structure set up for me to travel a lot. Plus, we didn't have any money at Compass, so we didn't have a lot of the budget for me to travel either.

So I ended up doing a ton of stuff telephonically. And I was able to make it successful. I could sell. I sold groups up to 3,000. I know for a fact I sold groups up to 3,000 employee lives telephonically. I even made a group of 6,000 telephonically. I would say 6,000 employee lives was probably the largest group that I sold completely telephonically with no in-person interaction whatsoever. No visit in person to them, no them doing an in-person visit to us, nada. So with that being said, what can one do telephonically? And how does one need to approach sales differently in a complex sale that is telephonic? Okay.

So we're going to go through that now. So A number one is, as you can imagine, while I did have a couple of larger, you know, large group sales, some large group sales, I would say that the size group was generally small. Now, so for those folks that are only doing solutions that are available to self-funded employers, you can still do solutions for self-funded employers, but it's going to be self-funded employers like mostly 200 to 2,000. I believe you can sell a lot of self-funded groups, 200 to 2,000 in the self-funded space, and you can certainly sell a ton.

In fact, I would tell you the majority of my fully insured groups, I sold telephonically. I did not sell in person. And so there's a ton of groups under 200 that are typically fully insured that you can sell telephonically as well. You know, Zoom, yada, yada, yada, yada. Okay. So fine. So the size of the group is one thing. So going after it, like if your prospects are like 10,000 employees plus, I'm not sure you can pull that off telephonically. But if they're sub 10,000 and certainly sub 3,000, even sub 6,000, I think you can do it.

Okay. Number two, what does that mean? That means you've got to be really good on the phone. Okay. What is being good on the phone mean? Okay. A number one, it means you can speak extemporaneously. That it's not just presentation, presentation, presentation, because you're not always going to sit there doing slide decks. It's a lot of just calls. It's a lot of just talking to people. And actually, this is the way that it used to be. Before email, people used to do a ton of just in the business world, people just talk on the phone all the time.

I mean, my dad was a businessman before, and he had, he had a cell phone in his car in like the late 1980s. He had one of those massive like in car, it wasn't even called a cell phone. It was called a car phone. And you just talked on the phone all the time. My dad was constantly talking on the phone. That's what you did. So it's, it's not a foreign concept. You know, back before the internet, you could sell stuff over the phone and getting on a plane used to be before the 1980s, getting on a plane used to be super expensive.

So you can definitely sell things over the phone. It is possible to build a rapport over the phone. And that's really the key is that you have to learn a way to build a rapport and to build a relationship over the phone because the reason, and the reason for that is because the relationships establish trust and they, and in order to sell, you have to establish trust. Okay. What does, what is the root of trust in that relationship? It is character and competency. And that's a Stephen Covey definition that trust is based upon two things.

It's based upon character and competency. Okay. Character is about following through on micro promises that you make. So someone asks you to provide a, uh, uh, uh, uh, an example utilization report. You provide it that day. You, somebody asks you to call them back on a certain day, you do it. You set up a webinar or a conference call, et cetera. You always show up for it no matter what. So the way that you establish trust it with a capital T is to establish trust with a small T in little things repeatedly over time.

So you want to have a lot. And it's not, and the best way to establish trust in that, and the best way to establish a relationship, by the way, is in a one-on-one fashion. So it's not just a mat. You don't, it's very hard to establish trust with a quote unquote group of people on the other end of the phone, you know, conference call webinar. And you think, Oh, I'm touching so many people. I'm able to kill 10 birds with one stone. But from a rapport standpoint, you are not, yes, you are communicating information, but you are not establishing trust in a relationship with those people.

Um, but you really got to do that one-on-one. Okay. So that's, that's one, that's one is that it has to be a lot of phone calls and it has to be repeated and you have to be, you know, follow through. You have to be honest. You have to be truthful in everything that you say. When I was working as a physician and doing sales at the same time, I had a patient who was a long time retired salesman. He was in sales for like 50 years. And I said, do you have any sales advice for me? And he said, yeah, don't lie. That was the a number one thing that he said was the most important thing.

And I will tell you that it's absolutely true in my opinion. So, um, and then the next thing is competence. Okay. And I feel like this is really hard because you got to do your homework and it's like championships are won in the preseason. So you have to be really competent. You have to be able to talk shop better than the other people on the phone. And especially if you're younger in your career, you don't have the experience that they do. So what does that mean? That means that you need to read as much as you possibly can.

Okay. There are a variety of sources where you can get this information. I think that the Axios Healthcare Daily Newsletter is very good. I think Kaiser Family Foundation is good. You read Health Affairs, which is the major healthcare policy journal. You read Becker's Hospital Review. You read Modern Healthcare. Modern Healthcare, you need a subscription for, um, but it's not a lot. Um, you read the Wall Street Journal. You read the New York Times. Uh, you read ProPublica. Now, Warren Buffett reads seven newspapers every day and he spends about six hours every day just reading and he can speed read.

So his six hours of reading is like probably the equivalent of like 12 hours of somebody else reading. So you have got to. Now, it is very much pre-season, you know, hitting the gym, doing training sort of stuff. It's not glamorous. It's something that accumulates very slowly over time. So just like going to the gym, you want results immediately. You want competence immediately. You can't get competence immediately. It has to be built slowly over time. But you have to be totally in the know so that you can always be bringing value.

Whenever you have, uh, these conversations, you're constantly bringing value. Like, hey, it's always like, hey, did you see, you know, such and such article? And if it's like, no, they're like, oh, let me tell you about it real quick. Or if it's yes, it's like, hey, what'd you think about that? Oh, that's really interesting. Let me tell you a couple of, you know, thoughts that I had about it. And those sort of being able to talk shop, not directly about your solution, but just about the industry is incredibly valuable in terms of building a rapport because you want to build a relationship with these people.

And I will tell you, of course, I had an advantage in being a medical doctor because I had four years of medical school and three years of residency and then being in private practice where I had, you know, I don't know what that, I can't keep track. I was like 12 years. I don't even remember how many years it was of all this exposure to what was driving claims costs that I could always add value to their perspective as an employee benefits professional. And I'd be like, look, this is, this is how discharges really work.

And this is what really drives readmissions. Or, you know, what really drives, um, elective surgery costs. Let me tell you what drives elective surgery costs. It's not surgery centers. It's hospital based outpatient surgery. Oh, did you know the majority of, of hospital surgeries are actually outpatient surgeries. Hospitals are essentially very large ambulatory surgery centers, uh, vast majority of surgeries that are not, are not inpatient surgeries. So, um, and that's just the tip of the iceberg. So the, um, the, you can't be competent overnight and it just has to, and I've said this in a prior, uh, podcast is you have to just listen and watch my A Healthcare Z videos.

I mean, that's just why I'm creating it is so that every day you can have something to educate yourself a little bit more, but that's not enough. If you, if you watch my A Healthcare Z videos and you think that's enough to gain confidence, it is not, it is, it is, what I do at A Healthcare Z is not sufficient for you. You have to do New York Times, Wall Street Journal, Modern Healthcare, Axios newsletter, the GIST Healthcare, uh, email newsletter is also very good. Um, so, uh, subscribe to Health Affairs.

So it, it requires a ton of reading and it also requires, uh, the videos on YouTube, like just pick any sort of S, uh, esoteric, uh, topic in, um, oh, also, um, drugchannels.net is excellent. Uh, 36 Brooklyn is excellent, both in the pharmaceutical world. Both of those are excellent. So all of these resources, like I said, there is not a, a wasted minute of the day when you are developing your competency. Okay. So you're going to have these, uh, these frequent phone interactions and you're going to have this, um, this competency that you develop over time.

And then you also need to then have, um, what is referred to as a transfer of trust. In other words, people that the, the broker consultant or that the HR person, the people that they know are also some people that you know. And so that person can essentially vouch for you. It's, it's sort of like a reference. Okay. But it's not going to be sort of a full level, uh, full sort of reference call. Like they're not going to necessarily like, let's say, you know, Joe and the person you're talking to knows Joe. It's not like the person is going to call up Joe and, um, be like, Hey, is Eric trustworthy? That's not what they're going to do.

I mean, people are so busy that they're not going to do that, but here's what you do with what you want to do is you want to breed familiarity. And the way that you do that is by talking about mutual people that, you know, what does that mean? That means you have to be good with names. Okay. So people are always like, Oh, I'm terrible with names. Listen, I'm terrible with names too, but just, it's just like tennis. You have to practice. I had to practice with names. You have to get good at names. Okay. And you have to get good about things about those people.

So where they work now, where they used to work, if they did, you know, if they spoke at a conference or if they, uh, wrote a, um, an op ed or, and what you're going to do is you're going to look at on LinkedIn, you're going to look at your mutual connections before you talk to anybody. You're going to go on LinkedIn and you're going to look at your mutual connections and you're going to see who you have in common so that you can just name drop people and you don't make a huge deal of it out of the beginning, but you sprinkle it throughout the conversation and you make, you know, small anecdotal, you know, make small anecdotal comments, you know, like, Oh, um, yeah.

Oh yeah. We both know so-and-so, uh, in Cleveland. And it's like, you know, Cleveland's the most interesting place in the world because the people will drive in from the suburbs with two feet of snow on their car and the people in the city only got a dusting. And it's because the, the Northeastern part of the city gets more lake effect snow than other parts. And it's like, Oh yeah, it's totally true. It's like crazy how much, you know, that part of the suburbs gets the snow and these other places, it gets like nothing.

Or you talk about the Greyhound bus station that, or, or Jacob's field or whatever. Right. So you, it's, it's, it's tying the, um, the person that you both mutually know with some other things that you mutually know, you know, and that's just, and so that's kind of small talk or chit chat, um, around shared acquaintances or shared people that you know. And I am not good at it. It requires skill and it requires, um, practice like tennis. It requires practice to, to develop that skill. And of course, the only way you're going to acquire all of this information about people is if you are interested in people.

So you have to have a genuine interest in people. And people always say, okay, are salespeople born or are they made? This is an aspect of salespeople, in my opinion, that is born. And what is born is a genuine interest in other people. Now, I have, I'm sure many of you have run into essentially sort of self-centered salespeople. And at the end of the day, anybody who's self-centered is kind of more interested in them themselves than in other people. And so they really don't have the ability to learn other people's names and really know a lot about, you know, details about other people because they're just not really interested in other people because they're interested in themselves.

So this is where you have a leg up on those more, no, nobody's perfect. I mean, everybody has a self-centered side and a, and a, and an interested in other people's side. You know, it's on a spectrum. It's not, it's not binary. It's not a one or a zero, myself included. But this is where if you take a sincere interest in other people, it will help you in your ability to remember things about them and be able to recall them at a moment's notice when you are extemporaneously speaking with, with people. And that is the other area about, um, the, the conversations that you're going to have on the phone with these people is that you're going to be able to speak extemporaneously with them.

And I am a horrible, I'm incredibly socially awkward. Um, I, um, I was horrible at, at small talk. I hated it and I was horrible at it. And it, it, it all through my teenage years and even into college, even in medical school. And I just had to, uh, it, it was really in, in residency because you had to chit chat with the patients and you had to chit chat with the nurses to develop a relationship in order to be able to get anything done in the hospital. Like if you don't have good relationships with the nurses, you will never get anything done at the hospital.

Um, and I mean, my work experience at stock camp helped me out a lot with that too. And so if you're not good at it, like you can get better and the way that you get better, again, it's like tennis, it's with practice. And the only way to get better at small, because small talk is much more genuine. Um, or I shouldn't say small talk speaking extemporaneously is much more genuine. Um, you know, people in the business world like to use the word authentic. Okay. It's not a sales presentation or pitch. You're just, you're just talk and shop.

You're speaking extemporaneously and one's ability to speak extemporaneously is hugely important. I, you know, again, I would argue that the ability to speak extemporaneously is in our salespeople born or made. I think this is something that you can make in a salesperson. So I think you have to have the inborn interest in other people, but I think you have, you know, I think that comes from your mother and your parents probably. Um, but the ability to speak extemporaneously absolutely can be learned and it's learned with tons of practice.

And that's where I love selling to small and medium sized groups because there was just a ton of groups and there was a ton of at bats. And so I had a ton of meetings in the first year or I should say two years that went horribly. My ability to do the small talk and build rapport was really bad. And I would even have brokers give me feedback about it, which, you know, at the time my ego was like, ah, but in retrospect, it was actually very kind of them to take the time to be like, look, you know, the way that you handled that was, was not necessarily what I would have liked.

Oh no. What have I done? So, um, and, and so to be, and I guess the other pieces, the other part of being a quote unquote salesperson that is born and not made is then the self-awareness. So if you can have the genuine interest in other people and the self-awareness to be like, okay, I messed that up. Let me learn from it as opposed to, well, no, they're just idiots. I'm going to keep doing what I'm doing. Then, uh, then I, I think that if you have those, you don't need a ton of inbound character inert or innate, I should say, um, characteristics.

You don't have a ton of those, but the ability, but, but those are a couple big ones that I think are very important. Now, um, the other thing, now this is, this is a little bit of a controversial subject and I'm going to get and probably get into a little bit of trouble here, but one of the key, and actually Malcolm Gladwell talks about this in his book, The Tipping Point, when he talks about the salesman as a way to develop a tipping point and salesmen do cause thing to tip. And he says that the way that salesmen tip is through their nonverbal communication.

And so nonverbal communication obviously is much harder to do over the phone than it is in person. And what is the nonverbal communication that is most frequently used by salespeople? It is, um, it's two things. It's either, it's, it's either one, it's either the alpha male, right? What are most salespeople? They're men and they're tall. And it just, it gets to the, the native, you know, um, caveman, you know, limbic system parts of our brain where we just want to quote unquote, trust a leader and our limbic brains, which are the very old central parts of our brain left over from the Neanderthal days, trusts the tall, large men because they were the alpha males of the tribe coming out of the cave who are going to protect us from the saber tooth tigers.

So what are all salespeople? They're all tall. Okay. I am not tall. I am five eight. Okay. I will tell you in the same breath that the most successful sales person that I had ever met in employee benefits is shorter than I am. He's like five seven. Okay. So there's no way that you have to be tall in order to be successful, but a lot of salespeople are tall and that, and that height and that size is that as an advantage for them is highly diminished now in coronavirus because they have to do it over the phone and they can't do it in person anymore.

So they don't have that height advantage anymore. So I, you know, I, I can't say that this is true all of the time and many of you listening to this might beg to differ with it. Um, but you know, I, I just have seen this so much. I mean, I talked to the vice, not the vice president above the vice president. He's like the head of the employee benefits section of a thousand person brokerage, you know, which is not huge, but it's not small. Okay. And he's six two. And he says that when they get, have their sales meetings, their sales conferences together every year, he is the shortest person in the room.

Okay. So you get, you get the idea. So the point is, is that if you are tall, that, you know, I don't think, I don't, you know, I don't know. I don't think tall people are like, I'm just going to intimidate my way into sales with my tallness. Like, I don't think it works that way. I mean, it's a subconscious thing that works to their advantage and they've, and they've used it. I mean, and that's fine. There's nothing wrong with that. Um, but it just means that if you were successful before in part, because you were tall, you just, you just don't have that anymore as an advantage.

And so you need to have the advantage of the, the establishing trust through competence and character and being able to speak extemporaneously and doing your homework on subject matters, et cetera, et cetera. So, um, so just if anything, it, it does to a certain extent level the playing field. Okay. So now what does this mean now that we've said that it is largely going to be a sales for groups sub 3000 to 6000? What does that mean? That means in order to meet your sales quota, almost by definition, you are going to have to have more smaller sales.

In other words, if your average group size was 2000, because you had, uh, groups that were above 2000 and, you know, and groups below 2000, well now your average size group might be only a thousand or seven 50 because those large groups don't pull your average group size up, which means that if you're going to meet your quota, you have to have more of these mid market and small groups in order to meet your quota. Okay. So what does that mean? That means that in a telephonic sales world, prospecting becomes that much more important.

That means you have to have an even larger top of your funnel. And that, again, that totally works. That should not be demoralizing because I, I look at it as an, as an advantage and as an opportunity because prospecting is so hard and most companies do it so poorly that if you can actually do it well, then that is going to tremendously separate you from the other salespeople and the other competition. So, um, so just know that it is a, this is a solvable problem. Like this is like, in my opinion, you know, hitting your quota is not impossible in a COVID pandemic world.

It just means you're going to have to do things a little differently as I have described in today's episode. And so with that, I will bring the how to sell in healthcare episode to a close for today. Again, this is Dr. Eric Bricker with A Healthcare Z. Thank you so much for being with me and I wish you the best of luck..

