Title: How to Sell in Healthcare PODCAST_ Episode 4 - First Sales Meeting and 3 Buyer Types_sA4nVd_qxYU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qxYU
Language: en
Duration: 30:46
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker with A Healthcare Z and welcome to the How to Sell in Healthcare podcast. This is episode four where we are going to cover, da-da-da-da, you have made it to your first client meeting. All right, let's talk about it. So in episodes one, two, and three, we've been basically working up to this point in terms of prospecting and working with the broker and now the broker has been interested enough that they then bring you to the very first meeting with their employer client. Now, given this is the age of coronavirus, that meeting will most likely be virtual, but the same thing applies if you're in person as well.

And I will tell you that I actually had a ton of experience with these virtual client meetings, not because I sold in a pandemic before, but because very early on at Compass, we were so cheap that we didn't have any sort of travel budget to actually go see these customers. So if there were, and especially if you're doing small and mid-sized groups, you can't necessarily travel for hours in a car or get on a plane to fly to these people. So literally I would have client meetings with a ton of groups between 200 and 2000 employees, a ton of mid-market employers.

I even would be able to, I even closed groups with 3000 employees without ever meeting them in person. So it is absolutely possible. And in the mid-market for the sake of time and efficiency, it makes probably the most sense to do it virtually. All right. So the framework that we need to understand for client meetings is there's a very famous sales approach called the Miller-Hyman School of Sales or the Miller-Hyman approach. And they have buyers divided into a buying committee, right? So typically at a company, it's not just a buyer of one, it's some sort of committee.

It's some sort of group decision. And that buying committee generally has three parts or segments. And those three parts are the economic buyer, the outcome buyer, and the technical buyer. Now, the economic buyer is, like it sounds, looking for the economic benefits of the particular solution. And in a business, those economic benefits are either going to be top line and or bottom line. In other words, they're either going to bring in more revenue to the business. So like some sort of like a sales or marketing solution might bring in more revenue to the business.

Or it's going to decrease, it's going to decrease expenses, therefore boosting the profit margin of the business. And of course, in healthcare and employee benefits for an employer, the economic buyer is interested in the latter. So you're going to be helping decrease healthcare costs for an employer. And so that's going to improve their profit margin. Now, typically the healthcare costs for an employer are, and there's some basic numbers that are good for you to understand, is it's typically the second or the third largest expense for an employer after payroll.

And typically it is on average about, now it depends upon the company, but we'll just say to use nice, easy round numbers, about $10,000 per employee per year in healthcare costs. Now, a single employee will generally cost anywhere from around, let's say $6,000 if it's a single employee and employee plus spouse might cost like $12,000. And then employee plus family might cost upwards of $20,000. And so obviously across an employer, let's say of a hundred employees, they're going to have like 60 of the employees that are single, another 30 of the employees that are employee plus spouse, and then 10 employees that are employee plus family.

So when you average and aggregate that all out, it comes out to an average of about $10,000 per employee per year. So it's very simple math. For every hundred employees, they're spending about a million dollars a year on health insurance. And that holds true if they're a fully insured plan, but you could also pretty much apply that to a self-funded group as well. So let's say it's a thousand employees instead of a hundred employees. Well, then they're probably spending about $10 million a year on health insurance, healthcare.

Now, the way that that then breaks out, another way to break out the cost that's helpful is between the medical spend and the pharmacy spend, because there are some solutions that only impact medical. There are some solutions that only impact pharmacy, and there's some solutions that impact both. And so typically the pharmacy spend is 25% of the overall healthcare costs. So if you've got a hundred person company that's spending a million dollars a year on healthcare, then $750,000 is going to the medical costs and $250,000 is going to the pharmacy costs.

Likewise, for that company of a thousand employees, you've got $7.5 million being spent on medical claims and $2.5 million being spent on pharmacy claims. So that can give you, you don't need to ask for, and that's helpful because when you're talking to the economic buyer, then you don't need to necessarily directly ask for their healthcare budget, because all you need to know is the number of employees that are on the plan. And that's the key statistic there, it's the number of employees that are on the plan, because there's a lot of companies that have a ton of part-time employees, and oftentimes they don't offer health insurance to the part-time employees.

So you don't want to know a total employee count. And you don't even want to know full, quote-unquote, membership count on the plan. All you want to know is the number of employees that are on the plan. Now sometimes, believe me, they can't even come up with that number. So what they do is they will tell you the total number of members on the plan or lives on the plan. And typically the ratio is one subscriber to two members. In other words, when you average it out, that company with 100 employees on the plan will probably have about 200 total plan members.

And so oftentimes when you're talking to a broker or to the employer itself, they'll say, hey, it's a 100 life group or it's a 200 life group. And it's very important that you right up front say, and oftentimes the slang term that's used is a subscriber is a household or it's a, quote-unquote, doorbell, whereas a member is a belly button or a heartbeat. So when somebody says, hey, it's a 200 life group, you're going to say, hey, is that 200 belly buttons or is that 200 doorbells? In other words, is that 200 members or is that 200 subscribers? Because otherwise you might be potentially doubling or you need to double or have your expectation around the overall health care costs for that employer and for the potential savings you're going to have for that employer or for your potential revenue depending upon how you're charging.

Okay, so you've got your economic buyer. As you can imagine, the economic buyer at a company is typically the CFO and or the CEO depending upon the size of the company and if they have, you know, those roles split out. But the CFO is absolutely the economic buyer. Okay, next you'll have the outcome buyer, which the solution is, okay, is the overall, quote-unquote, value of the benefit package. So it's not just, you know, does it save money, but really is, is this a workable solution for the employees and the company? In other words, the other role that benefits plays within a company is the company still needs to be able to attract and retain employees.

And the CFO might not be focused on that at all, but the head of HR is like, look, if we do this change for whatever vendor, blah, blah, blah, then are we not going to be able to, you know, hire people anymore because we just don't have competitive benefits anymore? Or are we going to lose some people because our benefits just aren't competitive anymore? So that is the, quote-unquote, outcome buyer. Sometimes it's referred to as the benefit buyer, but then that gets confusing with employee benefits.

And so we'll just call it the outcome buyer. The outcome buyer is the VP of HR, the head of HR, okay? So they need to not only, they do absolutely have a budget and they absolutely do need to weigh the, you know, to some extent the economic consequences of the employee benefits package, but they are looking at the overall strategic position of benefits within the company as it relates to the hiring and retention of employees at the company. Or if it's a unionized company, it might be in relation to, you know, union rules or the relationship with the union.

I mean, there's many other dynamics about the employee benefits package as a whole as it relates to the company than just the flat-out economics, which is what the CFO is oftentimes most concerned about. Okay. Then the third buyer is the technical buyer. The technical buyer is the one who's going to be interacting with your solution most frequently. And that could be the head of benefits or a benefits analyst. That head of benefits could be like the director of benefits. And the technical buyer is, okay, well, how easy are you to work with? Like what am I literally going to have to do on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis that is different because of your solution? And are you going to make my job incredibly harder? Are you going to make my job easier? Or are you going to be some sort of like neutral impact to my job? And so when you are typically in that client meeting, depending upon the client meeting, the very first meeting, you might have an economic buyer, an outcome buyer, and a technical buyer all in the same meeting.

And oh, by the way, those roles also are held by the people at the insurance brokerage as well. So typically the producer most closely aligns as the outcome buyer along with the VP of HR. And then the account manager at the brokerage is most aligns with the benefits manager or the benefits analyst or where the account manager, the account executive is a technical buyer. So it's very common for that, it could be that first meeting with the employer client or maybe the second meeting with the employer client where there will be the CFO, the VP of HR, the head of benefits, a benefits analyst, the broker producer, and the brokerage account manager.

And that's six people. So you've got those three roles of the economic buyer, the outcome buyer, and the technical buyer represented by those six people. And then you've got you or your selling team that you have there. So when you give your presentation, you have to understand that each of those constituents is going to be looking at your presentation through the lens of economic versus outcome versus technical buyer. And when they ask you questions, they are going to be asking you questions through the lens of economic versus outcome versus technical.

And so your job as the salesperson is to walk each of those three categories of constituents through your sales presentation simultaneously. And I will just tell you in my experience, that is really hard to do. In my opinion, that is the hardest thing about being a salesperson, at least for me. Because sales meetings, you know, you're going to have your quote unquote, you know, slide presentation or handout that people are going to walk through. And, you know, there's the classic saying that no battle plan survives the first shot of war.

And that's actually a phrase from Van Moltke, who was one of the head of like the Prussian military back in the 1800s. But so you've got your presentation, you've got your battle plan. But as soon as you start presenting, then people are going to start asking you questions and interrupting you. And that's actually a positive by sign. That's a good thing. If they're completely uninterested in your presentation, they're not going to say anything. And they're just going to be looking at their phone the whole time waiting for this thing to be over.

So if they're actually interrupting you and asking you questions and asking you to jump around your presentation. And oh, by the way, you do want to jump around your presentation to answer their questions. Then that's great. That's a positive by sign. You want that to happen. However, it is also exhausting and incredibly difficult to handle managing answering those questions, answering the technical questions to a technical, the technical buyer, answering the outcome question to the outcome buyer, answering the economic questions to the economic buyer.

So let me give you some specific examples of that. So during the presentation, you're going to be asked questions about implementation. This is a hugely important topic with any solution that you are selling, whether it be a software solution or a service solution, you name it. Implementation is a super huge topic. Okay. The technical buyer, that is almost the make or break issue on whether they would ever want to buy your service. Now, they're not going to say that. But if your implementation is really long and sounds like a ton of work, then the technical buyer will come up with a gazillion excuses as to why they do not want to work with you.

So just anticipate that. And you want to design your implementation process to be as easy as possible. Okay. Next, implementation through the eyes of the outcome buyer. How is the employee population and more importantly, how is the management and the executives going to take this program? Because if there's any hiccups or if this program is not going to go over favorably with the employees, then you better believe the VP of sales or the head of software engineering or whatever is going to be calling up the VP of HR.

Like, what are you doing and blah, blah, blah. And if this is going to cause a lot of consternation within the departments for, you know, let's say, you know, software or sales or operations or whatever, then the VP of HR is going to hear about it and going to have to deal with it. So when you talk about implementation, you're going to have to talk about how the service or the solution, what have you, is going to make the employees, like, love it. Like, it's not going to take a lot of work out of their day or it's going to solve an immediate problem for them or they're not going to see it at all.

You know, you could have some sort of, like, fraud auditing software where the employees, like, don't even see it at all and the HR person is going to, like, love that. You mean to tell me that you're going to be able to offer this solution and our employees aren't even going to know that it exists? And you're going to be like, yes! And they're going to be like, that is fantastic! Okay? And then you've got the economic buyer where around implementation, like, again, they might be really concerned about how much time you're going to take away from the employees to actually do their job.

Or you might talk about or it might be of concern to them if there's any extra cost that the company is going to have to bear in terms of having extra meetings or having extra collateral printed or any sort of additional cost associated with the implementation of such and such product. Whether that cost be in actual money or that cost to be in time. Especially of, like, one, like, salespeople. Like, the CFO most likely will be like, look, you better not take a minute of our sales team time because they need to be out there selling.

Not dealing with your hocus pocus employee benefits HR healthcare solution. Okay? Or vice versa. Or it's like, listen, right now your salespeople are having to spend time dealing with these problem medical bills. Let's say you've got a billing, you know, advocacy service like we had at Compass. Then you're going to be like, look, this is actually going to save your sales folks time. So they can actually focus on sales. It's actually going to improve their productivity work, not make it worse. So you need, now, are you, if the question is about implementation, you need to first and foremost address the implementation concern with the economic buyer, with the outcome buyer, with the technical buyer, whoever asked the question.

But when you're asking that question, oh, by the way, you need to in a brief, because, look, at the end of the day, the CFO might be like, well, I don't really care, you know, like, I don't really expect this to use, you know, any money at all. I don't really expect this to use, you know, our employees' time at all. Like, this is really not an issue for me. Fine. So then you just overtly say that when you're talking about implementation, but you don't have to perseverate on it. Now, another aspect in the sales process, of course, that the economic buyer is going to absolutely be concerned about is the measurement of the savings and the price.

Now, the technical buyer might be like, I don't care how much this costs. I don't care how you're going to measure it. I've got to implement this thing, and I've got to get it rolled out across our company. So me, as the technical buyer, I'm really not too concerned about the price, and I'm really not too concerned about how you're going to calculate ROI. Like, fine. So again, you're going to need to answer that, but you're going to need to answer it in a way that really hones that answer down to the economic buyer and does not, and, you know, and you need to have a cursory, you need to address that in a cursory fashion to maybe the technical buyer.

Maybe in terms of, like, the data that's required to do the measurement and how you're going to make those data requirements super easy, so it's not some sort of technical challenge for the technical buyer to get the data necessary to do the adequate measurement to measure the savings, blah, blah, blah, right? But that's hugely important. Now, the economic buyer might not even be at the meeting, in which case you're going to be focusing on outcome and technical issues for, like, 99% of the Q&A. Now, will you need to answer the economic questions down the road? Of course you will, but maybe not in that first meeting.

Likewise, sometimes, especially in these smaller companies, you might have the business owner in that meeting, and if you don't address how you calculate savings in plain English, not some sort of fancy, overly complicated way, but you're going to calculate savings in the way that a third grader could understand it, and the way that your fees are priced is, like, also in a way that a third grader can understand it, and you might have the person who has budgetary control, especially for groups that are under 100 or even groups that are under 200, you might have that person who's got the budgetary control in that first 30-minute call, and, like, that's make it or break it, and I will tell you that over 50% of the time, if that person with budgetary, and it typically happened in small group, if that person with budgetary control was in that 30-minute call, they were going to make the decision right then and there.

Sometimes they would make it right on the call, or sometimes, you know, you'd have your 30-minute call, you'd hang up, and then they'd talk about it, you know, right afterwards, and then they, you know, they'd tell the broker the broker would call you back later that day or within a week, but the point is you would not need another meeting if you had the person with budgetary control right there on that 30-minute call, and so if the group is under 100, there's a high likelihood that's going to be the case, and if the group is between 100 and 1,000, it's probably less than 50% chance that you're going to have that person with budgetary control on that call, but it still happens, okay? So just know that you've got to think about those three, and you need to write it down.

The Miller-Hyman approach is that you actually need to write down how you're going to approach those three different buyers for that particular company on the call. You need to have a plan, right? You can't just, you know, you'll eventually do it so much that you can do it on the fly, but in the beginning, you have to practice it, and you have to have a plan for how you're going to address those three people, and you need to be flexible. That's the other thing about those 30-minute calls is that you need to be flexible.

Okay, you ask the broker beforehand, okay, who's going to be on this call? And you're like, okay, it's going to be Sally, the VP of HR, but then you get on the call, and Sally has said that she also wants her benefits director, John, on it, and, oh, by the way, the CFOs can be on for the first five minutes. Like, and they don't tell you that beforehand. You just get on the call, and bada-bam, bada-bing, these people are on the call. You don't know that. So you, or likewise, you could be on this call, and then, you know, the CFO's got to drop off.

The VP of HR has to go fight a fire mid-call because somebody's, like, stealing printer paper, and then you're just there left with the benefits person talking about technical issues. You need to be prepared for that. So the flexibility, and, okay, so fine. So how do you get good at that? How do you get good at that? Because everybody that does employee benefits and health care sales in the beginning is really bad at that. I was awful at that, okay? That's to be expected. So this is why doing small group sales is so important because there's just a lot more small groups.

So you get more at-bats. And so you're going to go through these iterations, and, frankly, you're going to fumble the ball sometimes. And that's okay. But the point is that also to be a good salesperson, you're going to need to be a quick learner. And so there's always the question of, okay, are salespeople, are they born or are they made? And I don't know the answer to that. My best guess is that it's 50-50. Like 50% of a person's ability to sell is from their DNA and the way they were raised. And the other 50% they can be taught.

And so if the person doesn't have the right DNA and they weren't raised just in a type of family that could, listen, salespeople beget salespeople. Good salespeople. Guess what their parents did? They were salespeople. So it doesn't always happen that way. But, like, and at the same time, you can have somebody who has the right DNA and had the right family. And if you don't teach them and train them to be a salesperson, then they'll be horrible. So, you know, and they don't have to be perfect in either one of those, but you've got to have something to work with.

So that ability to, like, learn from your mistakes, in my opinion, is something that comes from your birth and from your family upbringing, where you were just brought up in such a way that you had enough humility and you were self-aware enough. And, you know, the fancy term for this is an autodidact. You are enough of an autodidact to be able to look at a situation and be able to say, look, what went wrong there? And what could I do in the future to either prevent that from happening or once it happens, I can clean up that, you know, mess in the meeting better than I did.

And, you know, all salespeople need to have the discipline and the commitment to constant improvement to, like, after every meeting, you say yourself to that. And you don't need your sales manager. If you need a sales manager to do that with you, then you've got a problem. You need to be able to do that yourself. And be able to be honest with yourself. And it's so hard, right? Because our pride and our ego get in the way. And we're blind to what we think are all of these good things that happen and how you crush the sales meeting or, you know, so just, you know, so-and-so on the other side of the table just had a bad attitude or whatever.

And it's like, no. It's like you can't blame it on them. I mean, like, in every single situation, you've got to be like Michael Jordan. Like, the ball is in your hands. What can you do to improve after that meeting? And you've got to have a ton of those meetings. And I'll be honest with you. I felt really nervous. And I felt like I did really bad in those meetings for probably two years. Okay? I would say for like, from, we started in the middle of 2007. From the middle of 2007 to the middle of 2008, I had an entire year of horrible calls and horrible meetings.

And it wasn't until the fall of 2008, after I'd gotten 14, 15 months under my belt, that at least the meetings were like intelligible. I could actually tell a story and actually walk somebody down the sales path and address all those three groups. So it takes time. Now, okay. So that, but that brings me to the next point that I will end the, this will be the last topic for the meeting. And that is when you're doing this meeting, it is super important. So you've got your slide deck and your presentation. It is super important for you to be able to interject stories and storytelling into your presentation.

Now, when you do, now there's different, now, in my opinion, again, storytelling, if you can't tell stories, you're dead in the water. Which is when I was, was, um, interviewing salespeople, I'd be like, hey, you know, and this is actually a Stephen Covey trick. I'd be like, tell me about yourself, like in elementary school. Like, what were you interested in? You know, what really got you excited? Because one, I was searching for their passion and where their passion manifested itself early in life. And then two, I wanted to see if they were just capable of telling a story about something that they were intimately familiar with, i.e.

themselves. Like, could they just recount a story from their youth? And then I would ask them the same thing. I'm like, okay, like middle school and high school. Same thing. Like, you know, tell me about like what you were really passionate about. What were you really interested in? And I'd do the same thing. Okay, walk me through like college and your early career. Like, same thing. What were you really passionate about? What really were you interested in? And if they could tell stories about that, then at least they had a fighting chance, right? Because if they couldn't tell stories, then it probably wasn't going to work.

So you have to be able to tell stories. Okay, what do I mean by telling stories? A story has a beginning and it has a middle and it has an end. And when you tell a story, that story needs to be about an individual employee for your solution. That story needs to be about like a set of claims or a business problem. Like you need to tell a story about like an employer and their musculoskeletal claims. Your story even needs to be at the individual like HR level. I had a story about how I was talking with one major retailer about another company that was successful.

And the VP of HR heard that story about how that other company had decreased their health care costs by 25% by putting in a consumer directed health plan with an HSA. And they surveyed their employees and their satisfaction with their benefits actually increased instead of decreasing. Because they actually gave them a sizable amount of money on that HSA. And how the head of benefits of that company was a hero. And the head of benefits at the retail company says, You know what that is? That's job security.

And I would tell that story to other VPs of HR. Because when you're thinking about like what is that, what does the CEO, what is the CFO, what does the VP of HR, what does the head of benefits or what is the benefits analyst, what do they, what really is their motivation? Their own motivation is job security and promotion. I mean that's ultimately, if they hire you, they're going to hire you because you can make them look good and therefore get a promotion. Or you can make them look good and therefore decrease the chance that they're going to get fired.

Like that is the reason ultimately that they are going to hire or not hire you. And so you don't need to the first thing out of your mouth sit down and be like, Okay, my solution is going to keep you from getting fired. No, you do not say that. But the point is that you're going to weave in stories about how this is going to make them look like a hero. Or it's going to make their job easier. Or it's going to put them in a position where they're going to be able to get a promotion. So you need to be able to weave in stories about how employees saved money themselves or got a better surgical outcome.

Or it changed the lives of their families because they had a grown child who was like 22 years old who was still on the plan who had a substance abuse problem. Who because of your mental health solution was actually able to successfully be in an outpatient substance abuse program for the first time. And five attempts or whatever it is. So that is best articulated with stories. Yes, you need to have numbers. Yes, you need to have graphs. But you need to have stories. And those stories need to then tug at the heartstrings of the economic buyer, the outcome buyer, and the technical buyer.

So with that, I will then end this episode number four of How to Sell in Healthcare. And again, thank you for giving me the most important thing that you have, which is your time and attention. And I wish you the best of luck in selling..

