Title: How to Sell in Healthcare PODCAST Ep 10 The Healthcare Selling Season - Timing is Everything_W7AXGH6uFVU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W7AXGH6uFVU
Language: en
Duration: 25:56
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker from A Health Care Z, and this is the How to Sell in Health Care podcast. Today's episode will be on the sales season for employee benefits, health insurance, and health care. Yes, there is a large degree of seasonality in employee benefits, health insurance, and health care sales, and understanding the timing of that seasonality is super important because if you try to sell the wrong, if you try to get the sale during the wrong time of the season, then you're totally going to fail.

It's like you got farmers have to plant in the spring and harvest in the fall. Similarly, employee benefits professionals need to plant during some times of the year and they need to harvest during other types of the year, and that changes based upon the size of the employer that you are selling to. So let's go through that now. Let's start with small group and mid-market sales season. Now, let's start with, of course, January 1st. And why are we starting with January 1st? It's because greater than 80% of employers have their insurance plans renewed on January 1.

So that means that they have gone, let's work backwards now, that means they've gone through open enrollment sometime in October, November, or the beginning of December, which means that they have made their choices on which vendors they're going to use and their budgetary decisions, et cetera, et cetera. In the small group, they are typically going to be, again, this is groups under 100, they're going to be fully insured, which means they're not even going to get their renewals from their insurance carrier until, like, the second week of September, maybe the third week of September.

So, and I won't even talk about the strategy about how the carriers intentionally want to drag their feet as long as possible so that they can get their claims experience in, and also so that they don't give the employers the enough time to effectively shop their coverage. But that's another conversation for another day. However, just know that for groups under 100, like, they're not going to make their buying decision for you, for you, probably until August at the early. So August, September, October, we had a ton of groups still in December that were making buy decisions.

And so it really wasn't until, like, almost Christmas. It was essentially, like, the third and fourth week of December where the, quote-unquote, buying decisions for January 1 starts, that was really sort of the deadline for them. Okay. Likewise, it is, they can always, depending upon your solution, et cetera, et cetera, they could make a buying decision off cycle, or they could have a non-1-1 plan year. Again, it's going to be less than 20% of all those groups that are going to have non-1-1 plan years. So just know that it can happen, but it's the vast minority of groups that are going to be in that scenario.

Okay. What does that mean? That means that for then the broker, again, who's going to be driving a lot of the decision-making or heavily influencing the decision-making for a lot of these small groups, that they are going to typically have some type of, not always, but sometimes they're going to have like a mid-year review sometime in, let's say, May or June. But oftentimes, they don't really, they only meet with them once a year. They might have a couple of phone calls with them. You might have a webinar or a conference call to discuss some new ideas with the employer, maybe over the spring.

But a lot of this is going to be educating the brokers and consultants about your, really the brokers and the small group, about your solution in the months, in the first half of the year. So really, January through June is your prime like educational opportunity. Now, typically, it was harder to get in front of brokers during the summer because their kids were out of school and a lot of times they were on vacation. You could still do it, but it was just harder. And actually, so I'm recording this in December, actually getting on a broker's calendar and contacting them in December to be like, hey, I'd love to get on your calendar in January.

It's a great opportunity to do that because oftentimes the brokers themselves, remember, it's part of their value add to their customers to be aware of the solutions that are in the marketplace. So if the broker is good and they're doing their job, they actually want to talk with you because they need to educate themselves about new and innovative solutions in the marketplace because they would hate to be caught flat-footed where another broker calls on their customer and talks to them about a new solution that they weren't even aware of.

Okay, that's going to make them look bad. So they actually have motivation. And I would actually use that as part of the prospecting of talking to them to be like, look, you need to be aware of us. We may or may not fit with some or all of your groups, but you need to be aware of us such that if you have a competing broker talk to your group about our solution and you are not already aware of what we do, that's going to make you look bad. So you want to use peer pressure to get them on the phone with you.

Again, you're going to start a five-minute phone call, then 30-minute presentation. And so really, January through June is a fantastic opportunity to do that. Now, pause. Let's now apply this to the mid-market. Let's say groups 100 to 2,000. This is going to be a mix of fully insured groups that are 100% credible and self-funded groups. Now, the same calendar will hold true for those mid-market brokers with some differences. Here are the differences. Especially for the self-funded groups, they will start there. Remember, because they actually have potentially a dedicated VP or director of benefits or a benefits manager or a benefits analyst, then they actually have people, they have staffing within their HR department that can actually devote some or all of their job to employee benefits, which means they actually have the bandwidth and the time and the interest and the competence to actually learn about your solution earlier in the year.

So you're not just going to be educating the brokers and consultants during the January through June period of time, but you're going to then want to then have in-person meetings, conference calls, webinars, etc. Then with those benefits people as well. You're going to be, you know, oftentimes facilitated by the broker because in the mid-market you're going to do mainly channel sales. But it is very reasonable to want to get, now you're not going to get a, sometimes you're going to get a buy decision by, you know, for very proactive employers, you're going to get a buy decision by June, July, June, July.

Because that's when they're doing their budgeting for the following plan year, for the January 1 of the following year. Now, obviously the closer the group is to 2,000 employees, the larger the group is, the earlier they will do their budgeting in the year. Now, some companies do their budgeting much earlier than others. So just know that you can have, you know, a group of 800 or a group of 1,500 that could make budgeting decisions in June, July, and August. But just know that a lot of those groups are still going to be making their budgeting decisions more August, September, October.

Okay? So, and I would say really August and September, it really does bunch in those two months. So you're going to get a big spike in kind of your buy decisions in August and September. For mid-market groups. And it's going to be kind of a bell-shaped curve, right? Well, you'll have a smaller number prior to August and also a smaller number after September. But it's really going to bunch August and September in terms of their budgeting decisions, right? Because that's Q3. And oftentimes they're going to be making budgeting decisions sort of a full quarter before that budget's going to have to go into place because they're going to need to look at their own revenue projections, their debt situation, yada, yada, yada.

Okay. So this is where if you are doing educational inbound marketing, which again is really good for the large market, but it can help for some of the brokers and some of the mid-market employers too. That's where you really want to push down hard on your educational webinars, presentations, you know, in a pre-COVID era or in a post-COVID era doing in-person conferences. You're going to really want to do that. January, everybody is still sort of quote-unquote recuperating from after, you know, and they're having to do some degree of administrative cleanup for their plans after January 1.

But really February through June 1 is a great time to do that. And I say through June 1 because it oftentimes, again, coincides with the school calendar and a lot of people go out of town over the summer, vacations, et cetera, such that it's harder to do those webinars and in-person conferences after June 1. Now, interestingly, that conference schedule and that webinar schedule is different in different geographic parts of the country because the school year is different in different parts of the country.

So in other words, in the South, school gets out much earlier than in other parts of the country, especially in Georgia. So schools in Georgia will often get out before Memorial Day. And so it's really hard then to do webinars and in-person conferences in the South. Really by mid-May is when that starts wrapping up. Whereas in the Northeast and on the West Coast, their schools go through mid-June. So you can still do webinars and in-person stuff if you're doing like we did a fair number of like local and regional conferences where we would travel and create sort of a conference on the road, if you will, in Chicago, for example.

That, you know, the Illinois schools, they'll go through the second or third week of June. So you can still end of May after, basically after Memorial Day, you can still get away with a quick conference before the end of the school year. So you want to be able to time your sort of conferences around people's availability and the school year. Okay. Now, that gets us to the large market. And for this, for the calendar, I'm going to actually separate out large market from jumbo. And I will basically say that large market is going to be $2,000 to $20,000 and jumbo is going to be $20,000 plus.

Now, sometimes you could say the large market is $2,000 to $50,000, but let's just say it's $2,000 to $20,000 for large market $20,000 plus jumbo. Now, the difference there is, is that the large market $2,000 to $20,000 is going to, again, still go off of the calendar year. And you will basically need to be in front of there. If you're going direct, you can actually go direct to the large market in December. Because those large markets, they typically do their open enrollments in October, maybe November. But because they're so big, they have to do it earlier.

So a lot of the stuff is like, you know, locked and loaded. It's like in place for the following plan year. It's kind of already done. So in December, a lot of times these people are already starting to look ahead for not January 1 of the following year, but January 1 of two years from now. So you can, again, absolutely, you can start, you know, emails and cold calls and being like, hey, can I get on a five minute call with you in December? And you might be able to get on a five minute call with them in December.

And then you're going to do a more, a deeper dive, you know, 30 minute call, not until January or February. So it actually starts a few months earlier. Now, because, again, large market stratifies, there are a lot more large market groups between 2,000 and let's say 8,000 than there are 8,000 to 20,000, right? Because there's just a lot more of those smaller large market groups. Now for them, you might still want to go occasionally, especially if you have a good relationship with a broker consultant from the mid market.

They might have a handful of groups that are 2,500, 3,000, 5,000, such that you actually want to be able to educate those brokers and consultants then before they bring you into those smaller large market groups. So again, you can get on their calendar in December or ask or ping them in December to get on their calendar in January, right after the first of the year. So my point is, is that the prospecting doesn't have to be dead in December. My point is, is that you, it would not be smart to prospect mid, small group in December.

That's a bad idea. It would not be good to prospect brokers that do mostly small group but then just happen to have a handful of three and 400 employers in December. That's not going to make sense. But for the larger mid market and the smaller large market, you absolutely can do prospecting and you should be doing prospecting in December. So if you're, in other words, you're going to basically segment your prospecting by the time of year. Now, that then gets you into, to after the first of the year with direct to the, the, the large market again, to a 20,000.

Okay. So then you're going to want to do those 30 minute phone calls and then going back to a prior episode about those mid funnel activities about giving example, uh, uh, reporting documents about doing claims based assessments. You're going to do that much more in Q1 and Q2. So January through June, whereas those assessment type things in the mid market, because again, you can still do it. We did a ton of assessments for mid market self-funded employers of like 700 employees. We did a ton of that. Those assessments would not happen until over the summer because essentially the HR and benefits people were building their case for their CFO budgetary request in August, September.

But the key to the large market is that those budgetary decisions often are made starting in June. So June and July are big budgetary decision months for the large market. So just know that for your large market sales, you're going to be getting the thumbs up or the thumbs down in June or July, which means that you have to be building your case with the assessments, with walking through, you know, a site visit, you know, what have you, um, in especially Q2. So in the spring is a big time in the large market for that selling to, to, to happen.

Um, and then if you, so, so this also then plays into your sales projections, right? Cause you're going to have, you know, percentage likelihood to close, et cetera, you know, red, yellow, green, there's all sorts of different ways of, uh, measuring your sales projections in your pipeline. Now the point is, is that if you have a large market group that has not made, and oftentimes they don't just come out and say no, what you get is a non answer. They haven't told you yes. They haven't told you no. They might just be ignoring you.

And so time and time again, myself included, because salespeople have to be internally optimistic. People say, Oh, I just haven't heard from that yet. And you got your fingers crossed and you're holding out hope that they still might say yes. But listen, if the group's over 2000 and certainly if the group is over 5,000 or 10,000, the likelihood that they're going to say yes after October 1st gets exceedingly low. And the likelihood that they're going to say yes after September 1st is exceedingly, exceedingly low because they've already made their budgetary decisions by then.

And they basically, it's like, look, if they're going to tell you, no, they're either, ah, it's kind of an awkward conversation. They don't want to disappoint you. So basically they just, they just won't call you back or, you know, they're busy and they're like, well, look, my answer is no. I'm not even going to be willing to take the time to call these people to tell them no because I'm moving on. I got other things I got to do. And that's fine. I mean, we're all grownups here. That's just part of this, of the sales process.

So, um, that is important for your sales projection. So let's say you've got, let's just use round numbers. Let's say you've got 10 large groups that you have in your, your pipeline. Okay. And you have heard, congratulations. You've heard from two of them that they are going to move forward, uh, with your solution. Now it's going to be a verbal yes, right? You're not going to get a, certainly get a signed con. All you're looking for is a verbal yes between, um, June and July for those large groups, because the contracting process also tends to be much slower within, because they got to send it, they actually have a legal department or they, you know, they got to send it to legal, et cetera, et cetera.

So it might take them until like September, October, November to actually get the contract signed. Shoot. We would be doing like open enrollment presentations with some of our large market groups. The contract still wasn't signed. And we would be like, is this okay? And like that we'd have to trust the HR person. They'd be like, oh yeah, we do this with our other vendors too. It's just the way our legal department works. And so that, listen, that's the way it is. And so is there a, is there a low likelihood that you still might not get paid? Sure.

But usually it works itself out. Now the, um, the, the, the, the sales projection on those other eight groups that did not buy by June or do not give you the verbal yes by June or July. That essentially, if you want to be conservative, that needs to be brought to zero. They're not going to buy from you. So you need to, you need to, to pull those down to zero or maybe you can squeeze in one. And so however you want to do that projection, you take the average, you know, annual recurring revenue for like the average size group of those, you know, eight that are left.

And you're like, okay, you can keep that in your projections. Okay. But that is super important that you also adjust, that you use the sales calendar to adjust your sales projections over the course of the year. Now there are political games that salespeople try to play with their sales projections. And I'm talking, because I was a business owner, because I own the business in addition to being sales that I was like, I was not interested in playing political games around my sales projections. So that's another conversation for another day.

And if you have the confidence as a salesperson to know that you can get a job somewhere else and you can basically establish yourself as having a good reputation for accurate sales projections within your company. Well, I'm just going to let you decide what's more important to you, hanging onto your job for an extra four or five months or having the reputation for actually having accurate sales projections. I mean, you know, I'll let you decide. Everybody's different in regards to that. Now, likewise, for your mid-market employers, for your 200 to 2000, if you haven't had budgetary decisions by June or July, you're not bringing those folks down to zero.

You might get, it might be just the opposite. You might have, let's say, 30 mid-market employers, and you might have heard from three that you have a yes-buy decision by June or July. You do not take the other employers, the other 27 employers, and bring them down to zero on July 31st. No, no, no. Because there absolutely is still a lot of yes decisions that are made in August. Now, by August 31st, do you need to start bringing down your mid-market sales projections if they are not? Of course. I would definitely, by August 31st, start bringing those projections down and definitely by September 30th, bringing those sales projections down on the mid-market.

Now, likewise, for the small group, would you bring those sales projections down to zero if they haven't bought? You haven't even started having conversations with your potential customers in the small group in June and July. So notice, by July 31st, you're winding down your sales pipeline for a large group. And you haven't even started hitting your small group yet. And depending upon the size of Salesforce, sometimes they stratify sales teams by small group, mid-market, large group, national account. Sometimes they'll put small and mid-market together.

So it depends, right? And so at Compass, we did all three. And when we were super small, we had our salespeople doing all three. And oh, by the way, it then stratifies in terms of your overall, you know, hitting your overall projections on your quota for the year, right? Because in other words, 50% of your sales are going to come from 5% of your groups. 80% of your sales are going to come from 20% of your groups. What does that mean? That means that by the time you get all of your large and your mid-market sales sort of wrapped up in verbal yeses by, let's say, September 30th at the latest, that means that if you're not at 80% of your quota, then you're probably not going to hit quota.

Because yeah, you can squeeze in another 20%. And listen, 20% is significant. I'm not downplaying 20%. You can squeeze in 20% more sales volume on your small group. But if you're only at 20% of your quota, it's probably fairly naive to think that you're going to get 80% of your quota from your small group because they're just not as many lives. You're going to have a lot more groups. But they're going to be 75 lives, 65 lives, etc. So it's important then in terms of, I was actually the sales manager too. So I had to actually, along with me sort of had a small sales analytics sales management team, then we had to do sales team based analytics and projections for the entire sales team.

And that was very important for forecasting and hiring. And so the wheels of the pipeline are very, and insight into the, insight, detailed insight into the pipeline is incredibly important for the business. And the holders of the key to the detailed insight into the pipeline are the salespeople. And salespeople, either because they're deceptive or because they're delusionally optimistic, do not always have the most accurate insight into that pipeline. And so it was super helpful for us to have an extra set of eyes on each salesperson's pipeline.

And that's why we would do weekly reviews with each salesperson to get, and we would talk group by group and broker by broker and consultant by consultant, so that we could get more of a, you know, you need to have more than one set of eyes looking at these things. And you need to have a, you know, a lot of times these sales calls would be in, a lot of times sales calls will be in groups. And of course, everybody wants to sound much better than things are actually going on these group calls. So you don't have it as a group call.

In fact, you don't even have a salesperson with multiple sales managers. You just do a one-to-one because people are much more likely to be truthful if it's just a one-to-one conversation. And again, it's not, you know, sometimes they're being deceptive, but a lot of times it's just, you know, maybe, you know, delusional is too hard of a word, but maybe they're just being overly optimistic about, you know, how the sales are going to close. So the seasonality of employee benefits sales is super important to understand because it's going to then determine which folks you're going to prospect to at which points during the year.

It's going to help you measure and benchmark the responsiveness of that prospecting over the course of the year. It's then going to help you measure and benchmark the frequency of your 30-minute phone calls, in-person presentations, and your mid-funnel activities. Briefly to recap, because if you are not having activity, is it because your message is wrong or is it because it's just the wrong type of time of year? And that's super important to differentiate because if your message is wrong, then you need to change the messaging.

But if your timing is wrong and your messaging is right, and you incorrectly misinterpret wrong timing as wrong message, then you're going to be changing your message and your slide deck and your prospecting when in fact that is the wrong thing to do. You're absolutely doing the right thing, but you're doing it at the wrong time. And it is a huge error to change what you are doing when the only problem is the timing. Okay? So, that is, and then of course in the sales projection is the final reasons why you want to have a detailed understanding of the seasonality of employee benefits, health insurance, and healthcare sales.

So, that wraps up this episode of the How to Sell in Healthcare podcast. Again, this is Dr. Eric Bricker with A Healthcare Z. Thank you so much for your time and attention on today's podcast, and I wish you the best of luck..

