Title: How Cancer Care Works_ Chemo_ Surgery _ Radiation Explained__N8b9Frbnu4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N8b9Frbnu4
Language: en
Duration: 7:09
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing the cancer patient progression. Now patient progression is actually a real term used by hospital systems in terms of how patients move through their hospital system. So that's why we're using it here. And cancer care is complicated and it's often misunderstood. So this flow chart is complicated but we're going to go through it slowly. Okay first off a patient will have some sort of symptom. Okay that's what SX is and it could be something very profound and serious like a blockage of the intestines causing someone to become dehydrated not be able to eat constantly throwing up and then oftentimes that person that needs to be admitted.

So that's why IEP stands for inpatient admitted for a workup to figure out what's going on. Now other times it's much more subtle. It could literally just be fatigue or maybe just weight loss. And so in that case the workup is typically done on an outpatient basis. Okay so there or it could be that you know literally a lump or a mass is noticed by the patient where again that oftentimes will be an outpatient workup. So just know that there will be some sort of initial presentation of symptoms. They could be dramatic or they could be rather mild.

Now those workups typically include blood tests. They typically include scans like CT scans and MRIs. But ultimately you cannot make a diagnosis of cancer until a biopsy is done. In other words a piece of the tissue is removed from the body and it is examined by a pathologist. Oftentimes they will use special stains from markers on the surface of the cells and they will be given a diagnosis. Okay so this is where the pathologists are really key because they're the ones that are actually making the diagnosis of.

This is breast cancer. This is colon cancer. This is lung cancer. So those diagnoses are not made based off of imaging. They're not made based off of lab tests. They're made off of the actual tissue. And sort of the offhanded comment that physicians will use is tissue is the issue. So until there is a tissue diagnosis the person does not officially have cancer. Now that's why I put no onc here. So this is not typically, this is typically an oncologist is not involved. Not involved. And it's only after the diagnosis of cancer is made that really the oncologist oftentimes get involved.

Now there are, I wrote kind of triangle here, right? So there's the medical oncologist that administers the chemo or the antibody based, a lot of these very expensive infusion medications. Now actually they're not quote unquote chemo as much as they are just monoclonal antibodies. So like Herceptin is a classic example of that for breast cancer. Okay then you have the surgeon. I have OR here in terms of having somebody go to the operating room to either have part or all of a tumor removed. And then I have rad onc for the radiation oncologist.

And they're the ones that administer the RT or the radiation therapy. And so these are x-rays, but they're incredibly powerful x-rays that are used to zap a tumor or part of a tumor. Okay. So I wrote one, two, and three here because what we're going to do through here are now several different types of cancers because depending upon the cancer, the person will either undergo all three of these types of interventions, maybe one, maybe two of them. So it's important to know that it is, it does have a lot of like permutations and combinations here.

So first off, let's start off with breast cancer because it's incredibly common, right? So oftentimes it depends upon the actual stage of the breast cancer and it could involve one and or two and or three. So it could really be any combination of these where oftentimes the person might get surgery to start, then they might get radiation therapy, then they might get chemo therapy. So they kind of go in this order. Okay. In other situations, they might just get the surgery and the radiation. So we won't get into the details of what determines that, but just know, depending upon the stage and the size of the cancer, there could be a different combination of these three.

Okay. Next up, colon cancer. Again, very similar to breast cancer. It could be the chemo, it could be the surgery, it could be the radiation. And with colon cancer, it actually can be in various orders. So sometimes they'll actually give chemo before they do surgery, or sometimes they'll do radiation before surgery, but sometimes they'll do the surgery first and then they'll do these other things afterwards. Okay. So it really depends upon, again, the location and the stage of the colon cancer. Okay. Next up, leukemia and lymphoma.

The important thing to note here for leukemia and lymphoma is that it's only medical oncology. There's no surgery, right? Because this is where the blood cell creation in the bone marrow is what is cancer. So they're actually referred to as quote unquote liquid tumors, because it's not actually a solid tumor. It's liquid. It's in the blood. Okay. So there, it's only the medical oncologist. Okay. So it's only the, the chemotherapy or the antibody therapy. So like rituxan is a very common antibody therapy that's used as an infusion to treat leukemia and lymphoma.

Okay. Next up, we have lung cancer, right? Again, similar to breast cancer, colon cancer, some combination of the three. All right. Now skin cancer is specifically on here because it is the most common type of cancer. However, it's important to note that the two most common types of skin cancer are basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. And they are so incredibly quote unquote mild that oftentimes they can be either surgically removed by a Mohs surgeon or even by the dermatologist themselves, like in the office.

So they are very, like, I don't want to call them wimpy, but they are incredibly different than the majority of these cancers. So when people talk about cancer prevalence, it's important to note that a lot of those cancers are very mild skin cancers. Of course, there's a huge exception to that. And that is melanoma. So melanoma is a very serious skin cancer. Now, and again, it involves one and two. It can involve chemotherapy and a body therapy, and then also surgery to remove the melanoma. And then last up, I put prostate cancer on here because it is one, both very common and two, it is almost solely run by the urologist.

Okay. So it's not the medical oncologist. It's not a surgeon. It's not a radiation oncologist. It's almost invariably, well, it's almost invariably run by the urologist. Okay. So this is where a person's like, well, I've got cancer. I should go to a cancer doctor. You actually would go to the urologist. Now there can be some radiation treatments that use a radiation oncologist for the prostate, but it's just important to know that this one is sort of an exception in that they greatly rely on the urologist. Okay. So that's obviously not all cancers, but you can see here that it is a very complicated flow chart.

And hopefully the person goes into remission and then they have what's referred to as disease free survival. But of course, that's not always the case. Sometimes there's a relapse, whether it be in the primary tumor location or a metastasis where it spreads somewhere else in the body. And then you go through this whole process again. And so given the severity of cancer, given its great expense, given just the tragedy that it is for the individual and their family and how it affects the plan, I wanted to go over the complex patient flow today.

And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

