Title: How to Sell in Healthcare PODCAST Ep 7 The 4 Ps of Sales and Marketing_DFX5o5mo7z0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DFX5o5mo7z0
Language: en
Duration: 28:12
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker with A Healthcare Z, and this is the How to Sell in Healthcare podcast. On today's episode, we're going to be talking about the four P's of sales and marketing, and specifically how you, as a salesperson, need to upmanage your own organization internally in order to make the sale happen. Now, what are the four P's? Oftentimes, they're referred to as the four P's of marketing, but I think of them more as marketing and sales. They are the product, the price, the placement, and the promotion.

Now, as salespeople, we are most directly involved in the placement and the promotion. With the placement being the channel, it's almost like merchandising. It's the way that the service or the solution is presented. It could be direct to the employer. It could be through a broker or benefit consultant, or probably the third way that employee benefit solutions happen is if they're baked into another existing vendor, i.e. the insurance carrier. For example, many employers get their Teladoc because major carriers use Teladoc as their baked-in telemedicine service.

It's not because their broker or consultant brought it to them, not because Teladoc sold to them directly, but because it's already part of their carrier solution. So that's placement. And then promotion is obviously what you're doing as far as your blocking and tackling as a salesperson. But notice, that's only two out of the four P's. So the price and the product are incredibly important for successful sales. And let's start with the product. Now, what do you as a salesperson want? What you need is you need something in that product to be 10x better than the marketplace.

And this comes from Jeffrey Moore, who I mentioned previously in the episode about the technology adoption lifecycle and Crossing the Chasm, his book. But really, if you're going to come in as a new entrant, then you really need to have something that differentiates yourself from the existing solutions out there. And not just by a little bit. The whole point of 10x is to say, look, you're differentiating by a lot. Now, that differentiation cannot just be quote unquote lower health care costs because that's too general because everybody claims to have to quote unquote lower health care costs.

What you need is a very specific and discreet niche of how your solution is 10x better. In other words, your solution is 10x better specifically for dialysis claims. Your solution is 10x better for mental health services. Your solution is 10x better for fraud, waste and abuse claims review and correction, recuperating money. So now, as a salesperson, you are going to be in tune with the marketplace and customers and prospective customers more so than anybody else in the company. And so what typically happens is that whether it's the R&D people or the product people or operations, they will have their own ideas of what they think the 10x value proposition is.

But the important thing is that it's not what your company feels like the 10x value proposition is. It is what the marketplace thinks as the 10x value proposition. Now, surprisingly, those two do not always line up. So this is where it's super important to be like, you know, hey, this is really the feature about our service that the marketplace finds incredibly more valuable than other aspects of the marketplace. And the other features essentially just have to be good enough on the product. So one is that there has to – and you can't pick too many things to be 10x of.

It's just one. And so product people and R&D and sometimes the IT people, they'd love to just build a Taj Mahal. They just want everything to be perfect. They want everything to be 10x. And the answer is that you will never get a product out the door. And if you do get a product out the door, it'll cost 10x more than anything else in the marketplace if you try to make everything so much better than everybody else. You don't need everything better than everybody else. You just need one thing better than everybody else because I'm sure many of you have heard these statistics before that buyers can only really remember like three features about what it is that you do.

So you've got to place a bet. You've got to take a risk. You've got to place a bet and say this is what we're going to hang our hat on and be 10x better than the competition. And that is important not only in terms of having a differentiator but then also in terms of not trying to boil the ocean and be so good at all these other things as well that frankly the product just doesn't get out. Especially in the beginning if you're dealing with a new product. And you could be working within a small sub-segment of a very large organization and you're just trying to get a product out within that sub-segment.

So in other words, you're not a startup or anything like that. You're just trying to launch something within a larger organization. And the key is that you just got to get it out. And sometimes the expression is go ugly early. I don't really like that expression. But the point is that you just got to get it out. And oftentimes the product people, they're going to want to hold on to this thing again until it's like the Taj Mahal. And you just need to get it like 90% the way there. You just need to get it out into the marketplace.

Because there is a 99% chance that the first iteration of what your product is, is not actually what the marketplace wants. And so you need market feedback as quickly as possible as to what is it about your product. So let's say you think you have a 10x value proposition. Let's say on narrow network carve-out surgical solutions, you got a narrow network surgery network for certain surgical services. And that's your employee benefit solution that you're selling. Well, you go out to the marketplace and you're going to get feedback from the marketplace.

And that feedback might be, you know what, we really just need this for our knees, hips, and spines. And here you go. You've gone out and built this huge surgical network for hernias and gallbladders and all sorts of stuff. And it's like, no, no, it's really just orthopedic services. And it's just knees, hips, and spines. I think it's literally all it is. And so there's so many things that you can do product-wise to just cut out all the fluff with all those other aspects of surgery and just focus on those that was not part of your original product design.

And of course, somebody within your organization thought that having some sort of special surgical network for every single surgery under the moon was going to be a good idea. But the marketplace is telling you that is not a good idea. And you got to listen to the marketplace. Everybody has to have the humility to listen to the marketplace. Okay, fine. You get the point. Now, so that gets us to, let's just move on to the price. Okay, so the price obviously is going to involve the finance department. It's going to involve operations.

And here, so the price is super important because, you know, Warren Buffett says, you know, Warren Buffett owns a lot of business-to-business companies. And he says, look, if you're in business, you either need to be one of two things. You either need to be the lowest price provider or you need to have brand, right? So he owns Coca-Cola. Coca-Cola is not the cheapest soda, but it's got the brand. Now, he has other services where they are the cheapest. Let's say like for Geico Insurance. Like arguably, they're like the cheapest insurance out there.

At least that's what they hang their hat on. And so everything else is kind of meh. So you're either going to have brand or you're going to be, you're going to pounce. And the greatest business-to-business success within the past 10 years by far is Amazon Web Services. I mean, it's like a $15 billion or $25 billion business on its own. And it didn't exist before like 2007. I mean, it's unreal in an incredibly crowded competitive space of computing power for the enterprise. I mean, that is a super hard space. And how did they do it? How did they do it? Because essentially they beat them on price.

Because the price of their cloud computing is so much cheaper than on-premise servers. And so that, so of course, as a salesperson, you're always going to want the quote-unquote price lower because you're always going to be getting like quote-unquote push back from the marketplace. And that gets us back to the technology adoption lifecycle around, look, you've got early adopters, you've got pragmatists, and you've got conservatives. So if you're out there talking to the marketplace and we said that conservatives were the most price sensitive, then just know that you're always going to have a set of people in the marketplace that no matter what, your product could be like almost free and you would still get complaints from the conservatives that your price was too high.

So you will never get rid of the noise that your price is too high. You will always have that. Now remember that pragmatists and early adopters are less price sensitive. So therefore, you don't have to, you're not trying to win all the business and know that you have pragmatists and early adopter clients that are willing to pay your higher price. So to a certain extent, if the conservatives, it's just not there yet for the price, then so be it. In fact, them complaining so much about the price just means that you probably got some conservative people on the buying team.

Okay, fine. But there are things that you can do to make your price more flexible. What do I mean? What I mean is, is that it's helpful to have like multiple versions of your solution that come in at different price points. Let's say the base, the buy up and the premium. And the, you know, maybe you only get one feature with the base, you get two features with the buy up, and you get three features with the premium. You get the idea. And that way, what that does is that like some, when we're doing business to business sales, you've got a buying committee, right? And you're going to have people that are early adopters and pragmatists that might be willing to pay that higher price on that buying committee.

But you might, you know, surprise, surprise, typically it's the CFO or the person who has budgetary control who is the conservative. You have to do something such that that buying committee can sort of come to a compromise. And oftentimes you'll have like the head of HR, the head of benefits who wants the full enchilada. They want the premium. And the CFO doesn't want anything at all. And so if you can give them a base or a buy up version of your service, yes, it's not the whole enchilada. You know, it does not going to, it's not going to deliver the full value of your total suite of services, but if you can come in at a lower price point, then you can get in the door.

And then through providing excellent service and value over time and great account management, then it provides an upsell opportunity over the road. So you'd be like missing on those sales if you didn't have a modular approach to price in your product offering. Okay. So that's one, number one. Number two on the price is that it's very important to make your price modular in terms of the size of the employee population that you are offering the service to and have lower price points for sub segments of the population.

So oftentimes in employee benefits, you've got, you know, first and foremost, you've got just the, just the employees that are on the benefits. So they have major medical and that's super important because whatever your fee is, they might, if it's per employee per month and they multiply that by the total number of employees, well, they might have 30,000 employees, but so many of them are part-time that they only have like 6,000 that are full-time and are on the major medical plan. So there it's like they'll, in their mind, they'll multiply it by 30,000 and they're like, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.

You multiply it by 6,000. And maybe for that 6,000, they offer a dual option of a CDHP and a traditional PPO plan, or they offer an HMO and a PPO plan. Say, okay, well, let's just offer it for people on like one of the plan. Plan choices, not both plan choices. Likewise, even getting to the point of, of piling, piloting it. And pilots oftentimes work great if you specifically do a pilot with the executives. You either do want to do one or two things with the pilots. You either want to do the pilots with the executives and that, and that's a riskier move because if the pilot is successful, you're more likely to flip that pilot into company.

Why? Because the executives are like, oh, we experienced this. This is awesome. Or if you want to take the other approach and you want to have the pilot as far away from the executives as possible, it makes it a lower risk pilot. But it also means that it's not going to get the, um, the visibility within the organization to then expand from a pilot out to the broader organization. So, and that's an individual decision. I will say in my experience, we kind of, we did it both ways. Um, and, and it really just depends upon, it depends upon the situation.

So if you have the flexibility to be able to kind of do either of those approaches with the pilot, then that's great. Okay. Now let's talk about how that, that price is actually structured. So typically in employee benefits, oftentimes it'll be a, uh, uh, per employee per month or a per employee on the plan is another way of saying per subscriber as opposed to per member, right? Because the typical ratio at an employer is two members for every one subscriber. And the subscriber is the employee that's on the plan.

And the reason it's the typical ratio of two to one is because you have a whole bunch of single employees. Then you'll have some with employee plus spouse or employee plus dependent. And then you'll have some with employee plus family. And by the time you sort of average all that out, it ends up being on average for every one subscriber. You have two total members on the plan, the subscriber themselves, and then an average of one more. So whether it's, you know, per employee per month on that, and that's where that is helpful on the pricing.

Because if your service is like employee dependent, um, let's say you're like an onsite or near site clinic. And so the number of employees is going to change the volume of potential people that can come into your clinic. Well, then that kind of makes sense. And also as employees hire and fire, they don't want to pay for people that they don't have. And, you know, vice versa, uh, as they're scaling up, you don't want them to not pay for people that they're adding on. And so that way, as there's company size changes, then the fee can flex as well.

And it's, it's pretty standard to be able to get an eligibility file because they're sending eligibility files out to everybody else. Anyway. Um, another way is just a fixed case rate, depending upon the type of solution you have, you might have like an access fee or like a licensing fee of $10,000 a month, a hundred thousand dollars a month. I mean, whatever your price point is for the solution that you're selling. Um, another way that employers will sometimes try to structure prices is percent of savings.

And I will just tell you right now that that is highly problematic and it's problematic for a number of reasons. One is that the market for savings measurement and employee benefits, unfortunately has been so tainted and spoiled that many people on the, on the employer side and the broker and consultant side do not believe savings figures much at all. So, and of course, you know, there is a gazillion stories that I could talk about this and a gazillion ways that I could just say that your savings might be totally real and completely valid, but because other entities, whether it be the PPO discount, which really isn't a discount at all.

And you had sort of fictitious savings off of fictitious billed charges or whether it's the quote unquote savings as promulgated by the PBM. I mean, 15, 10 years ago, when I first started talking with employers, people believed that. And I saw over the course of the, those 10 years, HR, VP of benefits, CFO, they really stopped believing that stuff, which to a certain extent, I mean, good for them because they finally, um, you know, became more awake and discerning in terms of what had been billed to them as quote unquote savings that in fact weren't savings at all.

So that being the case, the percentage of savings is always quote unquote attractive because it's like, well, you don't pay us unless, uh, we save you money. But, you know, healthcare costs and healthcare savings, uh, computation is complex. And at the end of the day, the person who's going to want to believe it is going to be the CFO and they're not a healthcare person. And even if your methodology for measuring the savings is like, you know, really solid, it's probably not going to be, you know, comprehensible by a, uh, or comprehended, I should say, by a CFO.

And so, and even if you're not even talking to the CFO, but the HR person's got to explain it to the, the CFO. So it's really, or the purchasing department or whoever. So at the end of the day, I, my own personal opinion is to not go down the percent of savings, uh, as the basis of your fee. Now, of course you're going to have stewardship reports and utilization reports and you can have savings reports. That's great. But you don't want to necessarily directly tie like what the monthly invoice is to that savings report, because then you're going to be in a situation where you might literally be arguing on a monthly basis about the payment of your invoice and as to whether or not it's accurate or not.

So that's an important point around, um, around the pricing. So now on this same theme of the internal, now when you're talking about price, we're talking about all this, it's important for, and this gets us, this dovetails us into the next topic, which is it's important for you as a salesperson to have relate positive working relationships with people within your organization outside of sales. It's of course, you know, for, in terms of like the, the, the placement, that's a business development sort of thing, right? What are the partnerships that we're going to make? It's important for you to have a good relationship with business development so that you can give them feedback about the, from the marketplace about how the channels are, are not working.

Of course, in regard, you know, with marketing, they're producing a lot of the collateral that you're using, et cetera, et cetera. So it's absolutely, I mean, uh, I've said this in previous, uh, podcasts, I would speak with our head of marketing on a daily basis. And it was super helpful because we were misaligned almost constantly, but we both knew it. And so we could like, you know, hash it out on a daily basis, how to get alignment. Okay. Likewise, that holds true for operations and for it and for, uh, and for finance.

Now, depending upon your role in the sales team, you know, I, I'll be honest with you. I, you know, because I founded the company, I had, you know, greater degree of latitude to be able to speak to these other parts of the company, which if you're in a large organization, you just might not have the latitude to be able to talk to people in IT and operations, et cetera, et cetera. But it's important then for whoever is the, you know, your, your sales manager or the senior person within your sales organization is to bring those people in, you know, have IT people come in onto conference calls or, you know, zoom meetings or in-person meetings and, you know, really listen to them and listen to the operations people and listen to the finance people so that when you need to talk about the price, you can listen to the finance people and understand why the product or services price the way it is from a company finance perspective.

Like you don't want to kill the company with your low price for your product. Like you obviously want the company to be viable and grow. Likewise, if you're going to make the service like modular, then the operations, the account management team need to understand, okay, well, how are we going to support a modular service of, you know, base buyout premium and how are we going to do account management for that? And you want to listen to them and understand where they're coming from. And likewise, because so much of the benefits and healthcare solutions these days are data driven.

What does the IT team always ask for is they want like every single data field under the sun and they want some sort of, you know, data feed that at the end of the day, if I, if your IT department got everything they wanted, it would take four years to set up the data feed. And you're like, well, we don't have four years. So to understand why it is that the IT folks, you know, or the analytics folks or whoever it is, why do they want all those fields? And be like, look, okay, you want these 35 fields, 55 fields, whatever it is.

Like, what if we, you know, we can, we can, you know, there's, you know, and it's great to work off of standard file feeds that they already have set up so that the customer doesn't have to, or the prospective customer doesn't have to create a new file fields. You'd be like, look, what files are you already sending out? And then get those fields and be like, look, you know, analytics folks, I know you want these 55 fields. They've got a report that already has these 25 fields on it. What would that do to our assessment or to our analytics if we just move forward with just these 25 fields and not all 55? And there might be aspects of the reporting that totally get destroyed by not having all 55 fields.

And the IT people are like, oh, we can't do this. We can't do this because we can't, we won't be able to produce these types of numbers and values. And we wouldn't be, we won't be able to have good metrics around our upper respiratory track ER admissions. And, you know, as a salesperson, you're like, you know what? I guarantee that the customer is not concerned about their upper respiratory track infection ER visits. Like that is not what's driving their claims costs. Okay. Like let's talk about ortho. Let's talk about cancer.

Let's talk about cardiovascular. If we don't have one piece of analytics around, around their upper respiratory track infections, guess what? That's totally okay. And the IT people typically don't have the context to even know that. I mean, they're just so married to the standard full enchilada reporting or analytics package that they're used to doing. So the, and, and all those conversations with IT, finance, operations, account management, super important in terms of having a relationship with them. All of that requires discussion and mutual understanding.

And none of that is possible until you have a positive relationship with these people. And you know how many kids they have. And you know if they got a dog or a cat and what their name is. And you as a salesperson are taking the time to take them out to lunch or just to call them and see, you know, how they're doing. So being in sales is not just about creating relationships outside of the company, but it's also creating relationships inside of the company such that because everybody who's done sales knows that there's a gazillion holes you got to thread, the gazillion needles you got to thread to close a deal.

And oftentimes those involve needles internally at your own organization. And if you can get aspects of your own organization to be flexible with the particular you know, needs of the sale, well, that's huge. I mean, that is huge. And you're going to be so much more successful long-term as a salesperson. And you're going to close more deals and you're going to close bigger deals. And all of that activity internally does not immediately produce revenue. It's not immediate. You know, you spend, you know, four hours a week doing that and it's not going to generate X number of leads, right? You're not going to necessarily keep track of it in salesforce.com.

And so it's going to count as, you know, quote unquote sales activity. But that ability to internally up-manage your own organization, at least for us. I mean, I can only speak for the company that we had. But I will tell you that from speaking with a lot of other salespeople as well, they were constantly having to push back against their own organization to get things, you know, because you essentially act as the customer advocate trying to get things. And it is so much more of a pleasant experience if you can do that in a way.

And frankly, you can just get to compromise so much better with such a better understanding. And I would tell you in my experience that like nine times out of 10, the problem of the customer saying, we want this and XYZ department within your company saying no or vice versa is really miscommunication. And I will just say this with the close. And what I found was the greatest source of that communication, miscommunication was email. And I found it was so much better to have a phone call or face-to-face or, you know, you know, FaceTime or Zoom call, whatever.

Because every time you have a problem that you're trying to work through with somebody, you want to look at it as an opportunity to build the relationship with that person. And it's impossible to build a relationship with someone over email because people hate their email. So if you email somebody, all you're doing is adding to something that they hate, which you don't want to do, right? And it's just, and it's just so, and it's not a lot. I mean, and frankly, it saves time. I mean, I would have five minute phone calls constantly.

And the number of five minute phone calls that just saved people from doing emails was just unreal. And if you're a salesperson, you're in the car a lot anyway, going to sales meetings. And so it's a great way to make use of time in your car without, you know, not checking your email while you're in the car driving. So, you know, being able to have good phone skills and being able to talk to people is just invaluable. And the easiest way, and I'm a horrible phone person, the easiest way to get better at it is just to start doing it.

It just takes a ton of practice. And nobody calls anybody anymore. So if you call somebody, you're going to totally throw them off the hook. Leave them a voicemail, you know, shoot them an email. If you do, if you do shoot them an email, like literally it's just the subject that says, hey, can you talk for five minutes this afternoon? And there's nobody in the email. And that's super helpful for just getting somebody on the phone where you can work through a discussion. I can't stand discussion. Discussions are so ineffective on email.

It's unreal. And so to the extent that you can, and no, very few people are going to like want to talk to you on the phone. Like you as the salesperson, you're like the talker in chief at your company. You're going to be the one that's going to be initiating these calls with these people. But anyway, I just encourage you to do that, to use the phone as much as humanly possible. I'll end with just saying that Charlie Munger and Warren Buffett have run Berkshire Hathaway with Warren Buffett being in Omaha and Charlie Munger being in Los Angeles for the entire duration of their relationship together at Berkshire Hathaway.

They have never worked or lived in the same city. So if they can accomplish what they've accomplished over the phone, then so can you. And that is some ideas around how to manage the price, the product, the promotion, and the placement, and how to internally manage your own organization to close the sale. And thank you for listening to the How to Sell in Healthcare podcast. Best of luck to you..

