Title: How Power Works in Healthcare_wo3iJenODAU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wo3iJenODAU
Language: en
Duration: 11:33
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

And one of the points that was shared to me by an ophthalmologist when I was training at the University of Illinois was that all organizations are political. So what the doctor at the University of Illinois said to me and what Bruce Buena de Mosquito says is that, look, politics is about power and power. There's political power, as in the government, but then there's also power within how is power distributed within corporations? How is power even distributed within a homeowners association? And so all of these dynamics of power apply to all these situations.

It's not just about politics. It's about hospitals. It's about physician groups. It's about health insurance companies. It's about pharmaceutical companies. So all of these organizations within health care have power structures. And this is how these power structures are organized. He has these four rules here. Okay. Rule number one, the person at the top, the leader, is really an expert in attaining and maintaining power. And that leader at the top, one, can't rule alone. So he or she has to form a coalition. No leader, by definition, a leader has to have followers.

And so that leader must form a coalition. So leaders don't lead by themselves. They have to have other people help them. And that is the coalition. Okay. Two, the leader has to gain control of the money and then use that money to buy loyalty from that coalition. So whether it's budgetary power within a company. And then the people who follow that leader are essentially following what the leader says and what the leader does because they want the money. So the leader uses the money to buy loyalty. Okay. Point number three, it's important to keep the size of that coalition relatively small because, of course, everybody has their own opinion.

And so the larger that coalition is, it's like herding cats, which is really hard to do. You need more money. It's hard to get them to all fall in line. So you want to keep that coalition as small as possible. And you do that by essentially forming an inner circle. Now, that inner circle does not necessarily have the official titles, but there are essentially people within the organization who themselves wield power. And it's those people, those influential people that the leader has to have in their coalition.

Okay. So one, you got to have a coalition. Two, you use money to buy loyalty from that coalition. Three, you keep the coalition small. And then here's point number four, which is hugely important. You have a large pool of candidates for that coalition that are outside of the coalition, such that if you have a member of the coalition who does not cooperate, they are easily replaceable. So everybody on the inner circle knows that they can be replaced. So they better do what the leader is telling them to do. Otherwise, they're gone.

They don't have leverage because they are replaceable. So those four points are hugely important. Now, fine, that's at the top. So the point that Bruce Brandon Mosquita then makes is, is that these power relationships are fractal. In other words, they are repeating patterns that are smaller and smaller and smaller, kind of like branches on a tree or how a snowflake is made. And so you have the leader and the, in this example, the coalition of two, but then those, this coalition of two in and of themselves are a leader.

And then they have a coalition of two that they have loyal supporters and an inner circle. And then they need, they need to take some of the money that's given to them, you know, in a corporation, it might be thought of as budget, right? So this is the budget for HR. This is the budget for sales. This is the budget for marketing. This is the budget for IT, right? And then they themselves need to distribute that budget to the loyal people underneath them. This is the, this is the budget for ETL. This is the budget for, uh, for DevOps.

This is, you, you get it. Okay. And it goes on and on and on. So this is where the pyramid of power is built within the organization. Now let's talk about specifics as it relates to healthcare. These are specific examples that I have personally seen. One, I have a good friend who's now the chief medical officer of an, of a large Illinois hospital. When he was the medical director for all of the outpatient clinics. So in other words, he wasn't the top doc at the hospital, but he was the top doc for all the outpatient clinics at the hospital.

And the hospital got a new CEO and the CEO. So in other words, this person, uh, my friend then reported to the CEO and the CEO said, I have, I'm going to create for you a special discretionary budget for you to pursue the areas of improvement within the outpatient clinics that you like. So they'd already gone through the budgetary process for the year. There was like, you know, the plans already made, et cetera, et cetera. And here the, uh, the CEO of the hospital was sort of taken the, um, the medical director to the side.

Like if this wasn't said in a meeting, it wasn't public. He was just like, Hey, I'm going to give you like a little bit of a slush fund for you to be able to like, do what you want to do within your job. Right. And so he, he, he, he was doing that to buy loyalty from my friend. Now I thought it was very odd. I didn't think things like that happened, but apparently they do. Okay. Next up. The next example is specifically for health insurance carriers. So I have been fortunate enough to actually be able to know and work with a variety of X health insurance executives at the major health insurance carriers.

And they have told me about how their organizations are structured. And again, it is a, these are huge organizations, right? With tens of thousands of employees. And it is a relatively small group of people at the top that drive the direction of the organization. Health insurance carriers are very top down organizations. They are also very siloed in that each of the different areas within the health insurance carrier just really focuses on that particular area and really doesn't know what the other people are doing.

And they're not really told what the other people are doing. So the people that are in sales, they're just kind of told about sales and the people that are in, um, case management are just told about case management and they're just doing case management stuff. Now, case management manages bed days. They deny to the hospital payment for, let's say there's a 10 day length of stay and the health insurance carrier is like, well, we're only going to pay for five. And that's, and so they deny the other five days.

And the sales team isn't really told about that. They're not really educated about that. Why is that important? Because when the hospital's not paid for the full length of stay, they're going to balance bill the member. And so you're going to get all these balance bills to the plan members that when the, when the salesperson is talking to the broker and to the employer about how great this health insurance company is, they don't even really understand how utilization management and denial for length of stay and bed days work.

Like they don't even know. And the reason that they don't know is because there used to be this training program within health insurance carriers called group school where the health insurance carriers would take their, their sales reps, their new sales reps. And they would put them through this multi-month long training program to teach them essentially how healthcare and health insurance works in detail. And the, and guess what? They don't do this anymore. They stopped group school. And all the health insurance carriers, health insurance reps who are like, you know, in their forties or older in their fifties, like they had group school, but all the younger health insurance sales reps, like they didn't go to group school because it doesn't exist anymore.

And these ex-health insurance executives have even told me that the carriers have essentially dumbed down their employees. Now, one might argue, is this intentional or not? I don't know. But the, the, the, the amount of training and understanding within the health insurance carrier hierarchy is, is much less than it needs to be again, because they, they don't want to have a lot of squabbling. They don't want to have a lot of people. They just want to have people do what they're told. And so they only like, who really knows the strategic direction of the, of the health insurance carrier.

It's only a small coalition at the top that actually understands that. And interestingly, you know what the largest group of a healthcare Z viewers is? It's people that work at health insurance companies. It's people that work at United, Blue Cross, Cigna and Aetna more so than any other constituency. And like, it's like thousands and thousands of health insurance employees watch my videos. Why? Like everything that I say on a healthcare Z, like they should already know, like there's nothing that I'm saying that should be a revelation to them.

But the point is that they don't and that they actually watch my videos so that they can actually be told what in the world is going on. Um, I have gobs of international, I have gobs of software developers in India that work for major health insurance carriers that watch my videos because no one has ever explained to them why they are creating the code and the software that they are creating. So they watch my videos and like, oh, that's the reason I'm creating that software. Okay. Next up in terms of the replaceability, the great example there is for pre-tenurement.

Pre-tenured medical school faculty. So we're to refer to as associate professors or assistant professors. In other words, they're not full professor. And when you're full professor, that means you're full tenured faculty, right? Which means it's much harder for you to get fired. And so the way to become, you can think of, and at medical schools, the vast majority of their faculty are not professors. They're not tenured full professors. The vast majority of faculty at a medical school are associate professors and assistant professors.

It's like a pyramid. And so in order for you to become a full professor, you have to, um, do what the organization wants you to do. You can't make noise. And the organization wants you to, to publish. Like that's, that's the primary goal of a medical school professor is to do research and publish. That's how you get, that's how you get, uh, that's how you get, uh, that's how you get, uh, that's how you get, uh, that's how you get promotions. And so if you don't do that, in, um, you're highly replaceable. And so everyone within the associate and assistant professors within medical schools are just fighting tooth and nail to become full professor because there's not a lot of full professor positions.

and they know not to rock the boat and to step out of, to know not to change anything. Because if they try to change anything, it's like, whoop, you're gone. Okay..

