Title: How to Choose a Doctor...Excerpt from Choosing a Doctor Webinar_K8uvf4dSP4I
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K8uvf4dSP4I
Language: en
Duration: 14:01
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Well, hello everyone and welcome to today's Simple Pay Health webinar. Choosing a doctor, the most powerful tool in healthcare. When it comes to choosing a doctor, the reason why the choice is so important is because different doctors practice medicine differently. The practice of medicine is not standardized. Okay, so let me give you a few examples. So in New York City specifically, there are 2.5 spine surgeries for every 1,000 Medicare patients. However, in the suburbs of Dallas down here where I am, there are nine spine surgeries for every Medicare, for every 1,000 Medicare patients.

Okay, do people in the suburbs of Dallas just have like horribly bad backs? Is their pathology just really bad? Are they just not amenable to steroid injections or medication or physical therapy? Is there really 300% more spine pathology in Dallas than in New York? The answer is no, absolutely not. Okay, another example. Many of you are familiar with this. This is in the world of employee benefits. So Walmart has a center of excellence program where if you go to a center of excellence for various services, they do it actually for knee and hip replacements, they do it for spine surgery, they do it for various heart surgeries as well, they do it for bariatric surgery, they do it for cancer.

Where Walmart will pay for the plan member and a family member to travel to whatever part of the country they need to go to, you know, pay for the hotel room for the family member, what have you. It's zero out of pocket costs for them to go and go to this center of excellence to get a second opinion. And what did they find specifically as it relates to cancer? Well, their center of excellence for cancer is the Mayo Clinic. That 55% of Walmart plan member patients who go to the Mayo Clinic for a second opinion on their cancer have their treatment plan changed.

You got to be kidding me. That just shows how non-standard the treatment plan for cancer is, is if you go to the Mayo Clinic and like, it's the flip of a coin as to whether or not they're actually going to keep your original treatment plan or completely change you. Different regimen. Let's move on to, okay. Now, how do you actually go about making that choice? Okay. So one, this is for non-emergencies. Okay. So listen, and the vast majority of healthcare is for non-emergencies. So we're not talking like a motor vehicle accident where you're unconscious and like, literally you're not calling the ambulance.

You're not in control of where the ambulance takes you or you're vomiting blood. And frankly, it's just like the closest place is where you're going to go. You're going to call 911. They're going to take you to this closest place because you're vomiting blood. Okay. The vast majority of healthcare situations are not like that. So how do you choose the best doctor in these non-emergency situations? Well, it depends. The answer in healthcare is almost always, it depends. And it depends on these four things. One, it depends upon the severity and the complexity of the condition.

In other words, the more complex the condition, the more selective you need to be. Two, it depends on location. It depends on geographic constraints in terms of, is it super convenient? In other words, it's close. Or are you going to have to spend a day traveling there? Or are you going to have to be overnight in order to get there and have your appointment? Third, just the appointment availability. Is the availability, is it this week? Is it next week? Are you going to have to wait a month? And it depends.

And then lastly is affordability. Okay. Obviously, one of the best things we can do from an affordability standpoint is make sure that we're choosing an in-network doctor and an in-network facility. And so what we're going to do is we're going to go through each one of these four criteria and how to think about these four criteria in different situations. Next slide. So the first scenario is low severity. So we have a ton of healthcare situations where frankly, it's not that severe. And so the way that you go about finding a doctor when it is a low severity situation is very different than the way you find a doctor for a high severity situation.

Okay. So the way that you go about finding a doctor changes. Okay. That's very important. You don't go about finding a doctor the same way for all situations. Okay. So when you're less selective, your options include things like, and by the way, and it needs to be a convenient location. It needs to be a convenient time and it needs to be in-network. Okay. So that's when you can absolutely use telemedicine. I myself absolutely use telemedicine too. Urgent care. You can absolutely use urgent care. Myself and my family, we use urgent care.

You could have an established, you could be an established patient with a current doctor. And you're like, well, I don't really know if the doctor is really good or bad. I just, I've been seeing them for weeks or months or years. I'm established. That might be totally fine. In a low severity situation, keep going to who you're seeing. Or frankly, if you're not seeing anybody, right? The statistic is, is that less than half of employees have actually seen a primary care physician in the past two years. So guess what? The majority of people on your plan actually don't have a primary care physician.

So you just try to find a primary care doc that has appointment availability. You're like, are they good? Are they not good? Well, if it's low severity, it doesn't matter. Just choose them. Like what might matter the most is just getting in the door, right? So here, getting in the door is the priority. Okay. What are some specific clinical examples of this? Okay. An upper respiratory tract infection. A urinary tract infection. Minor muscular sprains. An ankle sprain. A shoulder sprain. Okay. A knee sprain. Now, there are also less severe chronic conditions.

I would put hypertension and high cholesterol in this situation. You're like, you know, we had a wellness screening at work. We had a wellness fair. Turns out my blood pressure is elevated. Look, you just need to get in the door to get it treated. Okay. And so like, is your doctor like great? To a certain extent, managing hypertension is very straightforward. You just need to be treated. Likewise, like you don't wait six months to find like the world's expert on hypertension and travel to another state when you're just diagnosed with hypertension, because it's a very straightforward disease to treat.

Likewise with high cholesterol. Okay. So the good thing is, is that the majority of healthcare situations are actually low severity. So you don't have to be highly selective in all situations. In fact, time, just getting in the door and being able to do so easily is the most important thing. Like when my, you know, kids have upper respiratory tract infections, like, it's like, look, we just, we just got to get you in and we just need somebody in, you know, when, when they were babies, it's like, we just got to get them in there and just look at the eardrum to see if they have otitis media, middle ear infection.

Okay. Look, look, I mean, is it going to be their pediatrician? Is it going to be an urgent care center? Like to a certain extent, it doesn't matter. They just need to be seen. Okay. Next slide, please. Now we're going to change gears now to a high severity. And so this is where, you know, all of you who are tuning in today, it's like, okay, well, I want to find a high quality doctor because this is serious. Okay. And that's right. Serious medical situations require a serious effort in finding the doctor. Okay. So we're talking high severity and that high severity comes with a cost.

It means that your care almost de facto is going to be less convenient. It's going to take more time. It is going to require you to travel a further distance. Now, the networks are so big that you can still find an in-network doctor the majority of the time. However, it's not going to be as convenient. So what criteria do you go through? One, one of the best criteria to use is to go to physicians at the academic medical center that is in your area. Why in- so this is a university hospital. So in Dallas, where I'm looking, we only have one.

It's UT Southwestern. Okay. If you are in New York City, you have multiple options between NYU and Columbia and Mount Sinai. If you're in Chicago, you have Northwestern, you have the University of Chicago, you have the University of Illinois at Chicago, you have Rush. Okay. Um, why specifically these academic medical students? One, the vast majority of physicians at academic medical centers are on salary, which is great because you don't want the money impeding their clinical judgment. You don't want them doing more because they'll make more money.

You also don't want them doing less because they'll make more money if they do less, right? You want their clinical judgment to be independent of how they're paid. And so the best place to find doctors like that, frankly, is at academic medical centers. Two, because they're on salary and at academic medical centers, they actually have the time to stay current. They have a lot more clinical meetings, what are called rounds or grand rounds, where they're constantly discussing patients with their colleagues.

And they're learning about different aspects of different diseases. They're learning about new treatments for new diseases. Okay. Why is that important to be on salary for that? Because, I mean, I worked in a private practice hospital. When you're fee for service, time is money. And the doctors spend every single second humanly possible seeing patients so that they can bill. And they don't spend time on these meetings and these grand rounds and all these things to stay current in their knowledge base because they're too busy seeing patients and they're too busy billing.

Being paid on salary allows you to carve out time to stay current in your field. Now, at academic medical centers, you also tend to have a higher volume of more complex patients. So if you have Hodgkin's lymphoma and you go to an academic medical center, they'll be like, oh, yeah, we've got eight patients right now also with Hodgkin's lymphoma that we're also treating. And we pretty much always have eight patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma that we're currently treating. Whereas if you go to a community hospital, oh, yeah, we saw somebody with Hodgkin's lymphoma two years ago.

Like, you don't want that. You want somebody who has routinely seen these complex folks day in and day out. OK, now there are certain clinical situations where there is doctor outcomes and facility outcomes data available. So when the data is available and we're going to talk about where to find the data, when the data is available, you can use it. The data is not available for all diseases and all conditions, but for certain ones there is. So where there is the data, let's use it. Now, what are some examples of these serious medical conditions? OK, cancer, you're considering joint or spine surgery.

I would put diabetes in the serious category. Now, it's a silent disease. It lasts for decades. But at the end of the day, if you don't take care of your diabetes, you could end up blind. You could end up on dialysis. You could end up with non-healing ulcers on your feet that require part of your foot to be amputated. So I would not treat diabetes lightly. And so it's a it's a huge condition, right? It's over eight percent of the population. So you've got almost one out of every 10 of your plan members that has diabetes.

I would not put that in the less severe category. I would put that in the chronic. It's not severe as in like it's an emergency tomorrow, but it has dire consequences. I would put autoimmune diseases in that situation. Crohn's disease, rheumatoid arthritis. Okay, these autoimmune diseases, especially because they require these very expensive specialty medications. You really want a serious doctor who has serious quality working with patients who are on serious medications with serious side effects and serious expense.

You don't want to deal with this in a willy nilly fashion. Oh, but they're right down the street. They're super convenient. That might not be the best choice for you. So you might have to spend more time and effort and distance to get there because this is a serious situation. Okay, next slide, please. Okay. At the end of the day, this is what members at Compass and members at Simple Pay tell us all the time. They're like, look, just give me my benefits. Like, how in the world does this work? Just give me a doctor.

Like, who should I see? Get me through the system. There's all this red tape and prior authorizations and paperwork. And yadda yadda yadda. Just get it. It's a nightmare. Just get me through it. And I just want to get better. Okay. Give me my benefits. Get me a doctor. Get me through the system and get me better. Like, that's all they want. And that's all I want to help brokers and benefits consultants and, you know, HR professionals. Listen, I know that's what you want to do too. And it's totally a solvable problem. Next slide.

One. One. One. One. One. One. One. One. Two. One. Two. One. Two. Two..

