Title: ICHRA -  Individual Coverage HRA Explained_tPnPH9AZID8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tPnPH9AZID8
Language: en
Duration: 13:54
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the individual coverage health reimbursement arrangement or the ICRA as it is called. Not the ICHRA. Nobody says that. ICRA. Now you may have heard of ICRAs before and we're going to briefly go through what they are and why they are important for employee benefits professionals and employees. Okay, one, they were started actually, they're new, they start January 1 of 2020 and this is where the employer pays for the employee to buy their own health insurance.

So HRA, so you can use HRA money but it's not HRA to cover deductible expenses and coinsurance expenses. It's HRA money to pay the premium. So you can use pre-tax dollars to do that. You can even use pre-tax dollars. You can add additional money to that ICRA amount to actually pay for some of the out-of-pocket costs for the deductible coinsurance amounts as well for the plan that they choose. So the individual can go out and take the company's money and buy an individual or family plan. Completely separate. It could be Blue Cross, it could be United, it could be Cigna, it could be Aetna, it could be Centene, it could be Molina, it could be Oscar, you name it.

It could give you, the choices are a lot and that's the point. And oh by the way, if you have 50 or more employees, right, because you got to be ACA compliant, you need to provide enough money for the employee, for affordability reasons, for the employee to pay for the lowest cost silver plan in their area. So you can always do more than that, but you can't be like, okay, here's five dollars, go buy your insurance, right? So it needs to cover that silver plan, but you can make it more generous than that if the employer wants to.

Now, why would you do this? And I hinted at this just a minute ago. It's because of choice. I was thinking to myself after I did the previous presentation about how employees don't understand their benefits. It's to a certain extent, it's because the benefits are so complicated because they're trying to address so many different individual needs of what a particular person on the plan would find important. In other words, it's essentially central planning, right? We have central planning for employee benefits in America.

Now it's not central planning through the government, but it's central planning through your job. And we have central planning for other aspects of our job as well, like the type of software we have to use at work, right? That's the classic situation. You're like, wait a minute, I got like an iPhone and I got Google and I got all these great apps and software that I can use at night or on the weekends, but then I go to work and the software that I use at work like isn't even close to as good as what I use in my consumer experience.

Sorry, consumer IT is so much better than corporate IT. Why? Because corporate IT is central planning. Whereas if you actually had a choice, then it's amazing what happens when the market responds to consumers and consumers can vote with their feet. Okay, that's the example. Also the example of groceries. You walk into a grocery store, look at the number of salad dressing and ice cream choices you have. It's unbelievable. Why do we have all these choices? Why does Starbucks have an incredible amount of customization on your drink? I mean, there's like hundreds of drink combinations that you can have at Starbucks.

Why is that? It's because the key to the consumer experience is the customization and the choice. What do you have now? When you have central planning employee benefits, maybe you got a PPO with like a low deductible and a high deductible. Maybe you got an HMO option. Maybe you got an HSA option. What if the employees had dozens and dozens of choices that they could then customize for their particular needs? Let's go through some examples. So what I have is a matrix here for millennials, gen Xers, and boomers.

And then if you had a single male or a single female, or if you had an employee, either male or female, plus dependents, listen, if it was a millennial male, listen, maybe you're like, look, you know, my body's working pretty fine. I'll go with a super high deductible. But you know what? If I ever do need my health insurance, you know what I'm going to do? I'm going to go to the ER. So maybe I just want like an ER copay. And that would be the type of plan design I would want, like specialist visits. Like I don't care about any of that stuff.

Like the formulary, like I don't care about any of that stuff. Like all I care about is that if something happens, which is rare, like I'm just going to be able to go to the ER and it's not going to be like a financial catastrophe. And that might be the plan design for like a millennial male. Likewise, if you're a male boomer, maybe you'd be like, okay, the wheels are starting to come off. I want really low cost or maybe even free primary care visits. Likewise, and then I drew these boxes. It's like, okay, well, you can have specific combinations for if you were a gen X male, or if you were a millennial female, or a gen X female, or a boomer female.

And then if you were an employee plus dependents and you were a millennial, maybe you'd want a copay plan because you'd be having your kids and your spouse or your partner, what have you. But you'd do a narrow network because you want to keep the cost down. But maybe if you were a gen X, or maybe you'd want to have a wider network, right? And then maybe if you were a boomer, you'd want to have really low, but again, you'd want to have low copays for the primary care physician if you're a millennial or gen X.

But then once you're a boomer and you need more cardiologists and GI docs and ENT and blah, blah, blah, maybe you'd really want low specialist copays. Maybe that would be more important to you. The point is, is that this is, these are like nine different personas just at one particular company. And oh, by the way, the types of employers we have in America are also highly diverse. So you've got retail, which is about 20% of workers in America. You've got education, that's 13% of workers in America. You've got healthcare, that's 12% of people in America.

You've got manufacturing, that's 10%. You've got construction, that's 10%. You've got professional services, that's 5%. And you have a lot of organizations that are filled with different types of workers within your own company. So like, for example, like CVS itself, you've got retail workers and you've got healthcare workers now. You can have two completely different nine box grids at CVS for their retail workers versus their healthcare workers. Likewise, you could have a manufacturing company that also has a sales team, right? And an IT folks.

So you could have like professional service, you can have wholesale folks, and you could have manufacturing folks. Again, it's incredibly diverse. One of the things that struck me across going out and meeting many, hundreds and hundreds of our over 2,000 employer clients at Compass was how diverse the companies were and how diverse the employees were within those companies. They were diverse in terms of age. They were diverse in terms of race and ethnicity. They were diverse in terms of gender, right? I mean, we've got almost 50-50 males and females out in the workforce these days.

They're incredibly diverse. We had people that were from overseas. We had people that were in America. You have people that live in big cities. You have people that live in small towns, all within the same company. They're hugely diverse. You mean to tell me three plan options are going to somehow fit the needs of that diverse of a population? No way. That's not going to happen. Therefore, the employee experience by definition is not going to be good because it is centrally planned, right? It's like the old Burger King commercial from the 80s where they had communist swimwear and communist evening wear and communist casual wear.

And the joke was the outfit was the same for all those things, right? We don't want that. We want choice. Okay. So, but then you're like, okay, Dr. Bricker, but they tried to do these private exchanges back when the ACA was first passed. And those private exchanges, they were basically a failure. Like nobody does that. You're right. Now, here, I'll leave a link in the show notes to an article that examined the failure of these private exchanges. This is why they said they failed. They were super nervous about the technology.

It was untested. They didn't know if it was going to be a complete disaster because it was all new. Even the individual exchanges on the ACA were new. And the individual exchanges themselves through the government, through healthcare.gov, had the notorious spinning circle, which lasted for like 30 minutes. I mean, it was really bad. Okay. We've had time between 2010 and now, like 12 years, that people have a lot more. We've got exchange software that's like incredibly consumer friendly. I have no connection to HealthSherpa.

You go on to HealthSherpa and you see how friendly it is to sign up for individual insurance. It's like really easy. Okay. The ACA itself was new. They didn't know if individual policies, like if it would even like work. Okay. Now, of course, the big answer of them all is that, look, when you have an employer and you've got group purchasing, then you can have better premiums than if you just send people out as individuals. Aha. That's a very interesting point. Now, I'm not going to, you know, debate that, of course, if you have bulk purchasing, that's going to decrease your premiums than if you have individuals going out.

But those individuals can go out and choose lower premium options. Well, how can they have lower premium options? Who is the number one largest provider of ACA plans in America? It's Centene. You're like, what in the world is Centene? I don't even know what that is. Centene, they do gobs of Medicaid, but they threw their Ambetter brand. Again, I got no affiliation with Centene or Ambetter or anything like that. But the point is, is that Ambetter from Centene is the largest provider of more people are on an Ambetter Centene plan than anything else.

Why? Aha. It has lower allowed amounts because Centene does Medicaid and Medicare Advantage, and those Medicare Advantage contracted rates are very similar to Medicare rates. Aha. So you mean to tell me if we get an employee to sign up for an individual plan, then the contracted rate would actually be closer to a Medicare allowed amount? Aha. This is like what employers have been trying to accomplish with reference-based pricing. Listen, you've known this forever. I've talked about this a gazillion times on A Healthcare Z, how the PPO discounts and the PPO allowed amounts through a major insurance carrier on an employer-sponsored plan are terrible.

But compared to Medicare, according to the RAND, they're like 270% of Medicare. Wouldn't you love to be able to get your employees to have Medicare reimbursement rates? Guess what? You can. If they go on these plans, like Centene and there's other ones as well. So now, are you going to have as much choice? No. Are there going to be doctors and hospitals that would not accept those rates? Yeah. I mean, by definition, these Centene networks are narrow networks. But again, there's choice. Maybe your employees don't want the really large network.

Okay. And if you have employees that are choosing plans to have lower commercial insurance rates that are closer to Medicare, then you're going to decrease the volume of patients through those incredibly high PPO reimbursement rates. And so maybe hospitals would get off that gravy train of those PPO rates that they're using to cross-subsidize everything else. And they might actually have to do something about their own cost structure because they got more and more patients coming through at their Medicare rates as negotiated by these individual ACA plans.

Now, this is not a perfect solution. I'm not saying that this is the end-all be-all of healthcare cost control and finance perfection. But the point is, is that we got to think outside of the box. If we just think inside of the box here of PPO, HMO, CHP, point of service plan, three plan options, high, low, middle, blah, blah, blah. Like you have incredibly diverse employees with incredibly diverse needs. And if you can actually give them the ability to have choice and actually choose, I mean, look, they got ACA plans that have free primary care, or they have like free, like five primary care visits.

Like some people would want like three, five free primary care visits. There's some that have really broad formulas that have very narrow formulas. I mean, at the end of the day, maybe for some employers, these individual coverage HRA, these ICHRAs might make sense. It's worth looking into. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

