Title: Impact of Inflation on Healthcare_RAPMYN5_77Q
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=77Q
Language: en
Duration: 18:46
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is inflation's impact on healthcare. Now, as many of you know, we have very high inflation right now here in America and in many parts of the world. And it's very important to understand how this major macroeconomic event impacts healthcare. So I apologize in advance. Again, this is going to be super boring talk. But this is an incredibly monumental economic phenomenon that's happening right now. And we need to put it in context for healthcare.

This is a channel about healthcare finance. So we have to understand what's going on in inflation. Okay, first of all, what is inflation? It is a general increase in prices of goods and services. Now, of course, we have to have a graph of supply and demand if we're going to talk about finance and economics. So whenever you do this, you draw an x and y axis on the y axis, you put price and on the x axis, you put the quantity. And then you have a downward sloping demand curve and an upward sloping supply curve.

Now, in this particular instance, I put AD because it's aggregate demand. It's demand for all goods and services in the economy. And then I put AS for aggregate supply for all the supply in an economy and where they intersect. That's referred to as the equilibrium that determines the amount of goods and services that are produced. And then the price for all the goods and services that are produced. So what happens in inflation is the price goes up. Okay, well, there's two things that can cause the price to go up.

Either there can be a shift in in supply. You can see I drew the arrows and then a dotted line. And so if you shift in the supply, let's say you didn't change aggregate demand, and you just shift it in supply, then you would end up right there. So the price would go up. Okay, what causes a shift in in supply specifically now, as we are, you know, just finishing up the COVID pandemic? Okay, well, obviously, COVID lockdowns caused a decrease in supply. There was this huge issue with supply chains, you couldn't get things from China, you couldn't get things shipped in, in the port of Los Angeles, they couldn't get the stuff off the ships because people were out sick with COVID or in quarantine, etc, etc.

So there was a decrease in supply because of the pandemic here in America and across the world. Okay, now, you can also increase prices by shifting out demand. So right, so if you were here, and you shifted out demand to this dotted line, it would go to there. And a shift out in demand comes, so an increase in aggregate demand comes from things like, well, just an increase in cash. If you just give people money, they're going to go out and they're going to buy more goods and services. And then also, if you increase the amount of money in the overall economy, and the Federal Reserve can do that by lowering interest rates.

And in fact, they lowered interest rates to like zero. Okay, so now, in terms of the cash that was given out, so during the pandemic, the federal government gave up $931 billion in cash to people. We had payroll protection, we had direct distribution to individuals, etc. During the pandemic, they gave out $931 billion to approximately 165 million people. So if you take the 931, you divide it by 165 million, that means that on average, the people who received cash received on average $5,642 per person. That's a lot of money.

I mean, you can buy a used car with $5,600. You can buy a lot with $5,600. Okay, so that's the direct cash outlays. Now, in terms of the Federal Reserve increasing the money supply, the money supply, the amount of money that's in circulation in the economy increased by 40% during the pandemic and increased from $15 trillion to $22 trillion in a very short period of time. That is a massive expansion in the money supply. That's like if you're playing Monopoly, and all of a sudden, like, there's just gobs more money all over the game board.

Okay, now, I'm not making a value judgment about like whether this should or should not have been done during the pandemic. I mean, shoot, it was a very complicated time. People were losing their jobs left and right. Unemployment went through the roof. The hospitals were flooded. I mean, people were dying. I mean, it was horrible. Who's to say that that was the wrong thing to do? I mean, you know, in hindsight, was it right or was it wrong? Like, I'm not even here to discuss that. But what I'm here to say is, is that look, if you have a contraction in supply because of COVID lockdowns, and you have an increase in aggregate demand because of all of this stimulus, guess what you're going to get? You're going to get inflation.

The price is going to go up. And so we have both a contraction in supply and an expansion of demand, which causes the price to go up, excuse me, causes inflation to go up a lot. One definition of inflation is too much money chasing after too few goods and services. That's exactly what we have. We've got too much money chasing after too little stuff. Okay, so now, specifically, the CPI, which is one measurement of inflation, it peaked at 9.1% in June of 2022, which is the highest it's been. Now, it's about 8% now in the fall of 2022.

Now, it hasn't been that high since the 1970s to around 1980 when it was 12 to 14%. So we're talking like over 40 years ago. Like, I'm not laughing because it's funny. I'm just laughing because like that's an entire lifetime, right? So I'm 46. Essentially, like when I was born was the last time we were, or when I was a small child, it was the last time we were dealing with this. So for many Americans, especially of working age, like they have no concept of this. This is brand new to them. It's brand new to me. Okay, now, what does the Federal Reserve do to fix it? This has happened before.

It happened in the 70s and early 80s. What does the Federal Reserve do to fix it? They decrease the money supply. In other words, they shift aggregate demand back in. The Federal Reserve cannot do anything about supply. It can't make oil. It can't make nurses. It can't make doctors. It can't make school teachers. Okay, all it can do is decrease demand by decreasing the money supply. How does it decrease the money supply? It decreases the money supply by increasing interest rates and by doing what's called quantitative tightening.

We will not get into the details of that, but that's where, you know, interest rates now, look at your bank account. You can actually get like, say interest on your savings in your bank account. It's not like a ridiculous, you know, ridiculously small amount now. Like it's starting to be like a real number because interest rates are going up and that decreases aggregate demand. Now, what's that called when aggregate demand goes in? Okay, so let's say just this aggregate supply stays the same and aggregate demand goes in.

So in other words, you're going to go from that point down to that point. Well, that means that the both the price goes down and the quantity of goods goes down. What's that called? A recession. And that's exactly what Paul Volcker, the chair of the Federal Reserve back in the 70s did when inflation was 12 to 14%. He caused two recessions, not one, but two recessions in order to bring inflation down. Listen, and the current Federal Reserve Chairman, Jerome Powell, is specifically saying, look, it's going to be hard.

Like he's telling people, look, like buckle up and prepare. He doesn't use the R word recession, but he's like, look, it's going to be hard because you have to induce a recession in order to bring inflation down. That's how the Federal Reserve did it in the past. That might be how it's going to happen now. Okay, so now what happens during recession? Unemployment goes up. Fantastic. We've seen this before somewhat more recently in the great financial crisis, 2008 to 2010. Now, let's talk about healthcare. You've been super patient going through this super boring economic stuff.

But let's talk about how now that's going to affect healthcare in America. So what is the number one healthcare expense in America? By far and away, it is hospital costs. Okay, it's not doctors. It's not pharmaceuticals. It's not anything else. By far and away, over a trillion dollars a year is spent on hospital care. That is the biggest chunk. It's not the only chunk, but it's the biggest chunk. Now, what is the number one source of cost for hospitals? It's labor. Hospital care, by and large, is a service. Healthcare, by and large, is a services business that requires gobs of labor.

It requires a lot of time from a lot of people. Now, there has been a contraction in the supply of labor in healthcare. 100,000 nurses have left healthcare, have left nursing. They've retired. They've just picked a completely different field, not switching from one nursing job to another nursing job, like just completely exited healthcare. It's the highest number they've ever recorded. 117,000 doctors have left practicing medicine. They haven't moved from one doctor job to another doctor. They've completely left.

Now, a lot of them retired early because they were just older. Likewise with the nurses, they just retired because the average age for both nurses and doctors, they're actually really high. We have a lot of older doctors and nurses, and a lot of them just decided they wanted to retire. Again, I'm not judging them for that decision. They've just like, at the end of the day, they've been like, look, take this job and shove it. I'm not working here no more. I'm done. Okay. So now there was also fine. So aggregate supply went in.

There was also a shift out in aggregate demand from what? From people with COVID and also all the people that didn't get care for their diabetes and their congestive heart failure and their cancer screenings, et cetera, et cetera. So the patients that are coming in for non-COVID things are also sicker as well. So you have both a contraction in aggregate supply and an increase in aggregate demand specifically for healthcare services. So what does that do? That causes the price of healthcare to rise. All right.

So, and hospitals are already talking about how, look, we need to have increases in our unit costs. You need to pay us more. Now they can go to the government and they can lobby for that, or they can get it from employers. And we've seen the trend over the past 10 to 20 years is for more and more of a hospital's revenue to come from employer sponsored health plans. And so when they go to employers, they can increase the price. They can go to Blue Cross United, Cigna Aetna, and they can negotiate higher reimbursements from the insurance carriers.

They already have existing percentage charge discounts and other types of contract terms where the hospital can just dial up its charge master and increase the price per service for like complex care for like ICU care without even renegotiating their contracts. So to a certain extent, if you're a hospital, you may want to dial up the prices just within your own charge master to increase your commercially insured reimbursements. And then you also, what else can you do in addition to increasing the price? You can increase the quantity of care.

Well, how would a hospital do that? Well, now that we have so many more doctors that are employed by hospitals, it's upwards of 50%, like 10, 15 years ago, I've made other A Healthcare Z videos about this. Not nearly as many doctors were employed by hospitals, but now many more are. And what do hospitals do with employed physicians? They keep very close track of their RVUs and they have very specific targets. And there are anecdotal reports because people, you know, call me or email me of doctors saying, okay, well, this was your RVU, you know, requirement for this year.

Your RVU requirement for next year is going up. So they can actually increase the targeted RVUs for physicians to increase the quantity. And of course, if they see more patients and they order more tests and they do more procedures, et cetera, et cetera, I'm not saying every hospital is going to do that, but that's the way that hospitals can then adapt to higher costs themselves is by increasing prices to employers and increasing the quantity of services that they perform, not only for employer-sponsored plans, but also for Medicare as well, et cetera.

Now, what's the employer response to this? Again, we don't have to make this up. We can look to history to see what has happened in the past. Now, history doesn't always repeat, but it often rhymes. So what has been the employer response in the past to a recession? Well, duh, that's not complicated. It's layoffs. And guess what happens when you lay people off? You have fewer people on your employee health plan. That's how employers deal with healthcare costs in America. It's with a very blunt instrument. And this is exactly what they did during the great financial crisis, 2008, 2010.

They laid off gobs of employees. And guess what? Their overall healthcare budget, maybe not their cost per employee, but their overall healthcare budget went way down because they had a lot fewer plan members on their plan. Okay. So now you're a hospital. These people who no longer have employer-sponsored insurance, they still might have diabetes. They still might have a baby. They still might have cancer. What's going to happen? Well, they've got a few options. They can go on an Affordable Care Act, an ACA Obamacare plan.

They might be able to qualify for Medicaid, or they might just be uninsured. Remember, the mandate requiring people to have insurance is gone. You are no longer required to have insurance. So some people, I mean, if you have you looked at, if you have to pay an ACA premium and you don't get subsidized by the government, you're shelling out like 22 grand a year. Like a lot of people are going to be like, I am not paying the, like a car a year for an unsubsidized ACA plan. I'm just not going to have insurance.

And even if you do have an ACA plan, have you seen the deductibles on these things? I mean, it's like $2,000, $4,000, $6,000. You mean to tell me that people, you know, so even with a $6,000 deductible on an ACA plan, it's almost like not having insurance. Okay. What's my point? The reimbursement rates for ACA plans are very similar to Medicare Advantage rates, which are very similar to Medicare rates. So when a person is on an ACA plan, the ACA plan is not paying them what a commercially insured Blue Cross United Cigna Aetna person would get.

Not at all. So the reimbursement to hospitals is going to be much lower for people that are on ACA plans if the ACA roles go up because of rising unemployment. Medicaid reimbursement is even lower than Medicare reimbursement. So that's super low reimbursement. And then if they're uninsured, well, shoot, they got to go after them, send them to collections to try to collect. That's notoriously low collection rates for people who are not insured. What's my point? My point is, is that all of the employer response is actually going to result in a spiral, right? Because then you go back up here, then they're going to pass, try to pass on even more costs to the existing folks that are on employer sponsored health plans.

So I wouldn't be surprised if the per employee health care costs went up much higher. If we go into a recession, the actual per employee costs will probably go up even more because they'll try to, again, ratchet up the rates on the contracts with the carriers and increase their charge masters and increase the number of services per person that they do. Now, an employer, again, will have less people on their plan, but the per person cost is likely to be much higher. And then the hospitals are going to get squeezed, right? I mean, they're just saying, look, we are going to be in a real tight spot when it comes to revenue.

I don't disagree with that at all. And so what do other organizations do when they have decreased revenue? Listen, they're going to have to close some facilities. I mean, there was a big hospital in the suburbs of Dallas that closed down after the great financial crisis. I mean, like that happens, okay? Like they're going to have to lay off administrative staff. There's been huge bloat in hospital administrative staffs. They're going to have to just stop building. I mean, there's, you know, cranes going up. They might have to put those cranes on pause to stop those building projects.

Now, arguably, if a third of all health care is waste, now this is painful for hospitals. I'm not trying to negate that at all. And of course, no hospital is going to say that a hospital that they had was unnecessary or that their administrators were unnecessary or that their building project was unnecessary. Like I would never expect them to say that. But if one third of all health care is wasteful, then maybe those are things that are painful but necessary. Maybe there's pruning that has to happen on hospitals because hospital care that is reactive to people in desperation is not the right way to take care of people.

Letting people get to a point of desperation where they need hospitalization is not a sign of success. It's a sign of failure. And my only hope is that the pain of hospital closures and decrease administration and stopping building can then, what happens to a tree when you prune it, it grows back better. And it grows back with more smaller branches. So silly analogy aside, maybe those newer, smaller branches would be a lot more local primary care practices spread out all over the place that are easy for people to get to where they can have their medical issues and their health addressed as opposed to letting it come to a point of desperation that results in hospitalization.

We don't want hospitalizations. Okay, we want people to not have to need hospitalizations, which of course happens through primary care. And again, as I have said on many A Healthcare Z videos, employers can be part of who creates the primary care. You can do on-site, near-site clinics. You can do direct primary care. You can do virtual primary care. You, the employers, can be part of the solution to the green shoots of primary care as an alternative to hospital-based care. So it's going to be difficult, but this is how the context of overall inflation impacts healthcare.

And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

