Title: Impact of Out-of-Pocket Costs on Patients_c2PTY2Pzz5w
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2PTY2Pzz5w
Language: en
Duration: 14:52
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Well, hello, everyone, and welcome to the Simple Pay Health webinar, The Impact of Out-of-Pocket Costs on Health Outcomes and Utilization. I am Dr. Bricker, and I am the Medical Director for Simple Pay Health. Let's examine the current state of out-of-pocket costs. So, $1,763 is the average individual deductible for a person with employer-sponsored commercial insurance today. Of course, it's from the Kaizu Family Foundation Employee Benefits Survey. Many of you are familiar with that survey. Now, that $1,700 is up 61% from just over $1,000 about 10 years ago.

So, that gets you to a compounded annual growth rate, or a CAGR, sometimes is how it's pronounced, of about 5% per year. However, out-of-pocket costs have gotten to the point where one-third of workers have an individual deductible of $2,000. And remember, a family deductible is typically twice the individual deductible. So, if they actually have employee plus spouse or employee plus other dependents, then they're looking at a $4,000 deductible for their family. So, a significant minority have an individual deductible of over $2,000.

Now, this is, as a physician, this is one of the main reasons why I care so much about the money in healthcare. This is why I care so much about why healthcare is so expensive and why healthcare being so expensive is a problem. Healthcare being so expensive is a problem specifically because of point number four here. 40% of adults delayed or went without care in the previous year due to cost. So, high healthcare cost restricts access to necessary care. I'm going to say that again. High healthcare cost restricts access to necessary care.

Now, let's look at the impact of out-of-pocket costs on specific disease states. First, let's look at cancer, the out-of-pocket cost impact of cancer. So, currently, but again, the definition of insurance is the transference of RIC, and the current health insurance plan designs do not adequately cover treatment or provide financial security. In other words, they don't effectively accomplish what they are meant to do, which is to transfer risk. Case in point, one quarter of cancer patients go without care, delay care, or change treatment because of out-of-pocket costs.

Again, the reason why the money is important is because it impacts access. So, 25% of care, again, this is for insured people. They go without care, they delay care, or they change their treatment based on their out-of-pocket cost. Again, they have insurance. Okay. So, fine. So, you got a quarter of people who aren't doing what their physician recommends for them to do. And then, to make matters worse, 40% of cancer patients spend their entire life saving within two years of a cancer diagnosis. Again, these people have insurance.

So, again, I ask you, how effectively is their insurance transferring risk away from them if almost half of cancer patients are bankrupt within two years? So, I understand that there is not an infinite amount of money in the world, okay? I'm not trying to be Pollyannish here. But the correct expectation that, in my opinion, is not adequately explained to employees with their health insurance is that their health insurance does not really protect them financially. It doesn't. So, like, it's like if you, like, I almost feel like this is a consumer protection issue, that there should be, like, a required warning label on all health insurance plans, or employer-sponsored plans that says, this health insurance plan has been found to not adequately financially protect 40% of people with cancer.

However, this plan has resulted in 25% of people with cancer not being able to do what their doctor wants them to do because of cost. I really think there needs to be an upfront warning to consumers. Okay. So, let's say you just snapped your fingers and said, okay, look, we have this awesome insurance plan design. It's got low out-of-pocket costs. Like, it's got a super low deductible. It's got $100 deductible. Everything is a $5 copay. Let's just say we magically create this type of plan design where there's very little cost share with the employees.

Guess what? Still not enough because of the complexity of prior authorization, denials, and claims adjudication in healthcare in general and cancer care specifically. And I will give you an example here that literally happened to one of our members at Compass who worked for a big media company, for like one of these companies that owns like TV stations and newspapers, okay, a magazine. Okay. So, this was a 54-year-old woman with breast cancer who underwent surgery to remove the tumor and was receiving post-operative chemo.

Her insurance, which was one of the big four insurance carriers, it covered her first treatment of the chemo. Of course, like it's medically necessary. Like, it's the standard of care for her stage of breast cancer is you have the surgery and then you have the chemo afterwards. It's like totally normal. But then they denied the second treatment. What automatically happens when the insurance denies payment? The hospital automatically bills the patient. Because when anybody goes into a hospital or into a doctor's office, you sign a document every single time that says that the hospital or the doctor's office, they will bill the insurance company.

But if the insurance company doesn't pay or doesn't pay adequately, that you, the patient, are ultimately responsible for the bill. Anytime you ever receive medical services, you sign something that says you are ultimately responsible for the bill. You got insurance? Fantastic. We'll try to collect from them, but if they don't pay, then we're going after you. That's exactly what the hospital did. And they went after this woman for her second chemo treatment for $7,900. Okay. So, again, in this perfect world, this $100 deductible, $5 copays, like she still got a bill for $7,900.

The hospital went after her and called her and sent her letters for $7,900. She would have been sent to collections, potentially given the hospital, because some hospitals sue patients for their out-of-pocket costs. And in some states, the courts allow for their wages to be garnished by the hospital system. So, she could have. Now, of course, this woman was fortunate. She had Compass. And so, our Compass health pros then worked to have. And, of course, the prior authorization was done, but it just wasn't attached to the claim when they processed it.

So, we're like, look, she's got the prior authorization already. Here it is. You just have to attach it to that claim, which you didn't do. And so, she got it processed, and she did not have to pay the $7,900. But the point is, is that the out-of-pocket cost has to be addressed with two things. It has to be addressed with the plan design and this key point here at the bottom with the double asterisk. Healthcare navigation is a key component to controlling the impact of out-of-pocket costs on care, independent of plan design.

I'm going to say that again. Healthcare navigation is a key component to controlling the impact of out-of-pocket costs on care, independent of plan design. You have to have both the navigation and the plan design. Okay. Okay. Now, this is a Federal Reserve survey that I'm sure many of you are familiar with. 32% of households are unable to pay for a $500 unexpected expense with their savings, right? So, at the end of the day, the vast majority of people on this webinar have a lot more money than the rest of America, okay? And everybody knows that the vast majority of people in America, frankly, just don't have a lot of money, okay? So, 32% of households aren't able to pay for a $500 unexpected expense with their savings, okay? The air conditioner breaks.

Their car breaks down. They have a medical bill. All these unexpected expenses. Okay. So, now, this is not about judging a third of Americans and saying, well, they should spend less on Netflix and they should have a less expensive data plan on their cell phones. Like, listen, it is what it is. I'm not here to judge anybody. And I also don't think it's very practical to say, okay, well, we should just engage in some sort of awareness campaign so that people are just better savers. I mean, I guess you could do that, but I think the likelihood of success to that is pretty low, okay? So, I think at the end of the day, we just need to take the 32% of households not being able to come up with $500 from their savings as just as a given, okay? And obviously, this impacts employers differently.

So, for employers that have generally lower paid employees for service workers, hospitality, manufacturing, oftentimes, you know, caregivers, like nursing homes, like, it's probably much higher than 30%. And then, likewise, for, like, software technology companies, it's probably much lower than 32%, right? The average household income in America is about $60,000 per household per year. And so, there's some technology companies that are paying their employees like two, three times what the average household would make in America.

So, for them, it's probably much lower. But for their huge swaths of industries in America, this is a big deal, okay? So, this is why SimplePay exists. Because SimplePay is a $0 deductible plan. With affordable co-pay that are not paid at the doctor's office. But rather, you get a statement, like a credit card statement of your co-pays for that particular month. And then you can pay out those co-pays over 12 months at 0% interest. With embedded navigation from the carrier. So, it's part of the health plan, okay? We do this through Aetna Merit team in the vast majority of states in America.

So, it's on a big nationwide network. And it's done through a big nationwide TPA. That's owned by a big nationwide health insurance company. So, that it offers a large acceptability of a large network. But it uses a plan design that allows members to have greater access to the health care that they need due to a restructuring of the out-of-pocket cost. In other words, the out-of-pocket costs are not front-loaded in the deductible. Rather, they are spread out more evenly. Fine. There is a second dynamic. As you can see here, and these are actual example co-pays from a simple pay plan design.

You can see there is green best, yellow better, and red exclamation mark, just okay. So, then those co-pays are then stratified and ranked based on doctor and hospital value. You have all, Blue Cross United, Sigma, and Aetna all have very large networks. You want to be able to maximize and steer members to the doctors and hospitals within that network that, frankly, are higher quality. They're the types of doctors and hospitals you would want your family members going to. And they do not have egregious allowed amounts.

And so, you can use the co-pays to then guide people and financially incentivize them to use those green providers. And you can see that, yeah, you've got office visit co-pays for $20 or $40. You've got outpatient surgery at $650. Well, listen, we already said that a significant minority of American households can't come up with $500. So, you're still going to have a $650 outpatient surgery. So, you need to have an arthroscopic knee surgery, let's say. Okay, that's going to be a $650 co-pay. But that $650 can be paid over 12 months at 0% interest.

So, you're talking a little over a $50 co-pay or a $50 monthly payment. So, it's like a cell phone payment. So, if you can afford a cell phone payment, then you can afford the monthly charge of your outpatient surgery co-pay over time. And what we have found at SimplePay is that if you allow people to get the preventative, and by preventative, I don't mean the $0 stuff up there. I mean, look, you treat the diabetes while it's still small. You treat the hypertension while it's still small. You get the follow-up tests and studies from abnormal screen, right? So, let's say you have an abnormal mammogram.

Well, then you might have to have a breast biopsy. Well, that's not going to be covered at 100% with preventative. It's going to be, depending upon the type of procedure that it's going to be, it might fall under outpatient surgery. But it's not going to cost you thousands of dollars to get a breast biopsy to investigate to see if you have breast cancer. If you potentially have breast cancer on a mammogram, like you as an employer and you as an employee, you absolutely want to get that checked out. And so, this plan design allows for the financial burden to be dramatically decreased to allow that to happen, which is why I am so passionate about it..

