Title: In-Network Steerage Strategies for Employer-Sponsored Health Plans_g_vug-1WjBw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vug-1WjBw
Language: en
Duration: 11:49
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is in-network steerage strategies. Now this is a follow-up video to a previous A Healthcare Z video that I did called Get Serious About Healthcare Costs. So I will leave a link in the video description to that original video because this is the sequel to it. At the end of that video I described how low value specialist care is one of the root causes to high and rising employee health plan costs. And the antidote or the treatment for low value specialist care is steerage.

Now a lot of people are like, I don't like that word steerage. My employees don't like that word steerage. Listen, I get it. That's totally okay, right? The word steerage steerage implies, I don't know, like you're like a piece of meat, like cattle or something. But the point is, is that patients are steered. It has the word steer in it, okay? They're either going to be steered by their employers or they're going to be steered by the hospital system. So it's not a question of are you going to steer the employees or are you not going to steer the employees? The question is who is going to steer the employees because they are going to be steered, okay? Now what I've done is I've created two line charts here, okay? The top line chart is for employer steerage and the bottom line chart is for hospital system steerage, okay? Now over here on this side we have the most employer steerage and over here on this side we have the least employer steerage and we're going to go through a variety of strategies along this spectrum, okay? So the most steerage for an employer plan is the HMO, right? Everybody's familiar with that.

It has a PCP, a primary care physician gatekeeper that decides if you get a referral to a specialist or not and not only do they decide that, they decide which specialist you're going to go to, which dermatologist, which nephrologist, which cardiologist. So they decide if you do or do not get to go to a specialist and they decide which specialist you go to, right? Obviously Kaiser is like the A number one example of this model. A lot of Medicare Advantage plans are this model. Guess what? It's lower cost, right? So Kaiser ends up coming in like 20% lower than like other parts of the country.

Like if you were to compare like a Kaiser plan in Southern California to like another employer sponsored plan in like Chicago, the Kaiser plan is going to be like 20% less, okay? Now on the exact opposite side is the traditional PPO plan with co-pays and a low deductible, okay? Where there's total like self-referral. You want to go to a cardiologist? Go to a cardiologist. You want to go to a nephrologist? Go to a nephrologist. Go to anybody in network you want. And Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna have very large networks because when they go to an employer, the employer's like, well, how big is your network? Because I don't want employees coming to me saying that they can't find an in network doctor.

So like our network is huge, right? And it doesn't matter if they're an expensive or a high quality specialist. It doesn't matter if they're an inexpensive or a low quality specialist or somewhere in between. They can just go wherever they want and they're going to pay their specialist co-pay of 35 bucks or whatever it is. So be it. Okay. Then there's various gradations in between. Okay. So just above the HMO, there's the narrow network. They're like, look, we're not going to have a PCP gatekeeper telling you specifically where to go, but frankly, you're just not going to have as much choice because we're going to just not contract with the low value specialists.

Okay. And believe me, the insurance carriers know who the low value specialists are. They know who the cardiologists are that order a nuclear stress test for like almost every single patient that comes into their office. Like does everybody need to have a nuclear stress test that goes into a cardiologist's office? Probably not. Okay. Now, so by limiting that choice, guess what? They're steering. Okay. Now the next sort of tier up is to say, Hey, look, we're not going to narrow the network, but we as the employer, we're just going to offer you a free onsite or near site clinic for your primary care doc, because employers and insurance carriers, everybody knows that once the patient establishes a relationship with the primary care doc, then that primary care doc can be like, look, I want you to see this particular dermatologist, or I want you to see this particular endocrinologist.

Like nine times out of 10, the patient's going to be like, Oh, okay. Well, my primary care doc told me to go to that particular doctor. So that's where I'm going to go. So the steerage is done through the onsite or the near site primary care doctor through the employer. And like, how do you get people to use? And that's the key, right? How do you get people to use the onsite or near site clinic? And the answer is you make it free, right? And so I made a previous video. I'll leave a link in the video description about Purdue university, where I don't know if it was free, but the copay might've been like five bucks.

It was super inexpensive. And those primary care physicians at the employer sponsored onsite or near site clinic, they totally directed the steerage for the employees. And that was the mechanism for lowering the health plan costs for Purdue university or other employers. And this has been used for decades. Okay. Right. Whether it's serigraph or quad graphics or, you know, major manufacturers in America, you name it, this approach has been used successfully for decades. This is not some new idea. Okay. Next up, then you have tiered networks where to say, Hey, look, we're not going to make the network smaller, but we're going to say, look, there are high value and low value specialists within this network.

And if you want to go to a low value specialist, it's going to cost you the patient more with a higher copay. And if you want to go to a higher value specialist, we want you to do that. So we're going to incentivize you by making it a lower copay, right? So there you're still free to do whatever you want. But the point is, is that it's a tiered copay. Now, I'm the medical director of a company that does exactly that. Okay. So I want to make you aware of that. All right. Now, really the ideal situation is, is to combine the onsite near site clinic with the tiered network.

That's the best thing to do now. But you're like, well, this is all, you know, fine and good. But as an employer, I just don't like the way that this sounds. I just don't want to get into this whole steerage mumbo jumbo. Okay. Your employees will be steered. They're going to be steered by the hospital system. Let me tell you how. So here it's flip opposite. So here we have the most steerage for the hospital system on this side and the least steerage for the hospital system on this side. So if you have the most steerage is a primary care physician who works for the hospital system, because oftentimes those primary care physicians like have to refer for all their tests and their procedures to the hospital system.

They have to do referrals to all their specialists to the hospital system. So they are steering your patients within their hospital system by choosing a primary care physician that works for that hospital system. Next up, the urgent care clinics and the, uh, that are also run by the hospital system. So interestingly, a lot of times the urgent care clinics don't actually say the name of the hospital system on the front. There's a huge urgent care system, uh, or a whole huge bunch of urgent care clinics here in the Dallas area that are owned by a hospital system.

It doesn't say the name of that hospital system anywhere yet. When you get a referral from that urgent care, uh, center, there are a gazillion of them all over the place. You will be referred by the hospital, to the hospital system that owns the urgent care center. It is used to steer people. Same thing with the ER. You go to the ER, like it's obvious that it's that particular hospital. Like you get a referral to somebody. It's somebody associated with that hospital system. Okay. So there's steerage there. Okay. The, on the side of least amount of steerage, you have independent practices.

Like it could be a solo practice. It could be direct primary care. It could be a small group practice. Like they have no loyalty to the hospital whatsoever. Like they'll be like, okay, you want to go to an independent imaging center? Go to an independent imaging center. You want to go to the hospital? Go to the hospital. The physician is like, I'm just collecting my professional fees or I'm charging you a subscription to direct primary care. Like I'm not associated with any hospital system. Like I'm agnostic. Okay.

Then, so if you, as you can imagine, if you're in a situation where you, the employer, well, you're like, I don't want to get into the steerage business and you got a PPO and all the employees can just do self referral and you combine that in an environment that has hospital run primary care doctors and urgent care centers and ERs, guess what you will have? You will have incredibly expensive healthcare costs with utilization of low value specialists. Okay. So this is, this is one end of the spectrum. Whereas if you have like the other end of the spectrum down here, then like when that PCP has to make a referral out to a specialist, that independent specialist is like, okay, it's an independent, um, you know, neurologist and they're like, Oh, well we need to do a brain MRI, but we can do that in an independent imaging center because I, as the independent neurologist, I'm not associated with any particular hospital system.

Like that's the best case scenario. Okay. Then there's gradations in between. So the gradation is okay. It could be an employed specialist, right? And there the example would be like the car, a cardiologist is employed by the hospital system. So if you need to get an echocardiogram or a stress test, like it's going to be within that hospital system, it's not going to mean like, they're not going to refer you out to some other location. So like your choice in the specialist, they pretty much guarantees that all your ancillary services, test procedures, yada, yada, yada are going to be within that hospital system because the doctor's employed by the hospital system.

Okay. Next up is sort of the next gradation that has some degree of more independence is going to be if there is a, the, the physician is not an employee of a hospital, but the physician has entered into a joint venture with a hospital owned facility. And this is big for like orthopedic surgeons do this a lot. Gastroenterologists will do this. Sometimes OBGYNs will do this. Okay. Sometimes urologists will do this where they're an independent practice. They don't work for the hospital, but they have profit sharing with the ambulatory surgery center that's owned by the hospital.

And so the orthopedist doesn't have to operate at that particular ambulatory surgery center. The orthopedist doesn't have to order the MRI at that particular hospital system. But if they perform the procedure at that ambulatory surgery center, then they're going to get paid more because they're going to get a piece of the facility fee. Whereas these independent doctors, they're never getting a piece of the facility fee. Okay. So again, so there's steerage. This has the greatest, this has the least amount of steerage for a hospital system.

This has the most amount of steerage for a hospital system. So just know that with your employees as an employer, if you are not going to steer your employees, then the local hospital systems will. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare C..

