Title: Independent Physicians Will Win - Introduction to Meroka_SCzh9Bidt14
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SCzh9Bidt14
Language: en
Duration: 3:20
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and today I'd like to speak with you about why independent physicians will win. Now, independent physicians can provide better patient care, they themselves have more freedom and autonomy, and they can provide patient care at lower cost. Now, conversely, the majority of doctors in America are actually employed by hospitals and private equity firms and insurance companies. That's right, 74% of doctors are employed. They're not independent. So why is that? If independence is so much better, why are so many doctors employed? Well, when doctors graduate from medical school and finish their residency, on average, they have $240,000 of educational debt that they need to pay off.

And it's really hard for them to acquire patients. And it's also really hard for them to get paid by insurance companies. And so as a result, they join hospitals and private equity firms and insurance companies so they can get patients and be able to be paid reasonably and then be able to pay back that debt, which is accruing interest. Now, there are catalysts for change. So the pendulum has swung in the direction of physicians being employed. But now it's actually swinging back. And there's four reasons for that.

One, the government is actually opposing it. So there are acquisitions of physician practices that the government is like actively opposing and going against both at the federal and the state level. Two, physicians are burnt out. There is incredible job dissatisfaction when they are employed by a hospital or a private equity firm or an insurance company. They don't like it. And then three, there's financial confiscation by the employer. In other words, a lot of the value and a lot of the revenue that the physician is billing and bringing in is essentially being taken away from them.

And then finally, fourth, there's a lot of new technology that frankly allows for much more effective revenue cycle management. In other words, billing and getting paid and also that decrease the cost of administration. But a lot of this new technology, frankly, isn't adopted by these employers of physicians because there's such large organizations that they kind of stick with their old systems. So what is a model or a framework for being independent? Well, one is to have skin in the game, not only for yourself as a physician, but also for your nurses and the other employees that work at the independent practice as well.

And the structure for that skin in the game is referred to as an ESOP, an employee share ownership program. Now, that provides financial alignment such that you have all the physicians and the nurses and all the other employees working in the same direction for the good of the patients and the good of the practice. Now, there's a new company called Maroka that's actually helping physician practices form ESOPs. And if you'd like to learn more about them, then see the link in the video description below. Thank you for watching..

