Title: Individual Health Insurance Marketing Explained_oLNtG7yvPDI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oLNtG7yvPDI
Language: en
Duration: 6:16
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is ad spend on the individual health insurance market. So I've been doing some work on Texas Family Insurance and I wanted to share with you some of the findings because I think it's relevant to the A Healthcare Z audience as it relates to the individual health insurance market. So here what I found is that the cost per click for the word health insurance isn't two cents, it's not even a dollar, it is $16 per click. When I told this to a colleague of mine, like his jaw dropped, okay, right? When we think of cost per click, we think in pennies, right? It turns out that insurance has the highest cost per click of any other industry.

In fact, the highest is auto insurance, which has a cost per click of $50 per click. And so as I was doing my research, I'm like, okay, well, I'm just going to go ahead and do this. I clicked on it. And guess what it does? The majority of the time those ads are not for insurance companies that are selling health insurance on the individual, you know, ACA marketplace. No, they are lead generation companies that just turn around and sell your contact information. So that's what I did. And within 30 seconds of filling that out, I got bombarded by calls and texts and emails by about 20 different places, people, yada, yada, yada.

Look, insurance has to be sold at the state level. I'm in Texas. These people were not even from Texas. Like the biggest guy that does this is in Florida. Okay. So like, it got me thinking. I'm like, look, there's all this money that's being spent on Google ads. That's money that's not being spent on medication or care. I'm like 16 bucks. Like every time somebody clicks one of those things, I mean, that's like a month's worth of medication. Sometimes it's three months worth of medication. I mean, you put a handful of those clicks together, like you could totally pay for somebody's insulin.

So that got me thinking, okay, well, what's the role of advertising in the individual marketplace? And how does that relate to, you know, effectively spending money on healthcare? Like, is that the right thing to do? Well, let's look at a similar situation, which is individual auto insurance. Okay. So as many of you probably know, State Farm is the 800 pound gorilla when it comes to auto insurance. In the year 2000, they were 18%. They were number one, 18% of the market share. Number one. Geico, 5%. Progressive, 5%.

The only two auto insurance companies that have made significant market share gains in the past 18, 19, 20 years are only Geico and Progressive. That's it. Nobody else has made progress. Now, Geico's gone from 5% to 14%. They've almost tripled. And Progressive's gone from 5% to 12%. They've over doubled. And in other words, they're nipping at the heels of State Farm here. What do they do? What do they do? Geico, of course, does ads only. They don't use brokers at all. And Progressive does a ton of ads. They do some brokerage, but they do a ton of ads.

In fact, Geico spends over a billion dollars a year on advertising, right? We all know the Gekko. We all know the Caveman. We all know Flow, right? They all spent all this money so that we know this. Now, arguably, did that add any value to their auto insurance policies? Did it make them cheaper? Did it make their customer service better? Et cetera, et cetera? I don't know. It certainly raised awareness. Now, for businesses to grow through marketing, it doesn't have to be spent on advertising, right? There are many other companies that are highly successful that spend almost zero on marketing.

Two examples of that are Starbucks and Amazon. So, they use their marketing dollars to improve the product or service, to essentially make it remarkable so that people will talk about it. And that word of mouth is much more powerful than any $1 billion Geico advertising campaign. So, let's apply that same model to the individual health insurance market. So, here we have a bar chart of overall premium and spend for, let's say, one individual health insurance company. Or just their individual policies. So, they've got to spend 85% on claims with the 85% medical loss ratio.

That leaves them 15% less. Let's say they spent 5% on ads, 5% on administration. They've got to pay salaries for people. And then they make a 5% profit margin. Now, let's move over to a world where they don't spend any money on advertising. Well, they could take that by 5 percentage points and just increase the MLR. They could do less strict prior authorization. They could lower their co-pays. I mean, there's a lot of things that they could do to increase the amount that they paid. That might make the more, quote unquote, care that you could buy for the dollar premium that you spend.

Or they could take the 5 percentage points that they're not spending on advertising and they could use it to cut out the premium. So, in other words, their MLR would stay the same, the admin would stay the same, the profit margin would stay the same. But the overall premium would be 5 percentage points less because they weren't spending the money on advertising. So, arguably, my point for today is that scenario middle and scenario end would improve the value of the health insurance product. Right? Either because they're covering more stuff and paying out more claims.

Or just because it's cheaper and it leaves more money in their customers' pockets. But spending the 5 percent or whatever the billion dollars that it is on advertising, are we going to start having geckos and cavemen selling health insurance? And is that really going to add value? And so really, I mean, my answer to that is that it's very important for me personally to be as efficient as possible with my advertising. Because essentially, I don't want to waste money in healthcare on advertising when it could be spent on actual care itself.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

