Title: Inelastic Demand in Healthcare_ Economic Implications of Pain_ Suffering and Imminent Death_wSS_4E2s_OE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OE
Language: en
Duration: 5:05
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing inelastic demand in healthcare. Now this is not going to be some esoteric talk about economics. This is going to be very pragmatic. So first of all, what is inelastic demand? It is when the quantity consumed of a product or service does not change significantly when the price changes. And so going back to economics 101, right, we have supply and demand. And here on the y-axis we have the price and on the x-axis we have the quantity.

And the typical demand curve is downward sloping, right, because the higher the price, the less that is typically demanded and the lower the price, the more that is demanded. Okay, great. So you can see here the straight line up and down is a perfectly inelastic demand. And this is where the quantity doesn't change regardless of what the price is. Now, to actually, in healthcare, of course, we're concerned about prices. So in order to determine the price of something, you don't just need the demand curve, you also need the supply curve.

And the supply curve is upward sloping, right? So the more that a company or a person can charge for a service, the more they're going to supply and vice versa. Okay, so inelastic demand in and of itself does not create high prices. What creates high prices is inelastic demand along with contracted supply. So when supply moves in this direction, you'll see that the intersection of these lines goes up and increases the price. Okay, great. Not all situations in healthcare have decreased supply. So you've got a lot of choices when it comes to like, I don't know, dermatologists for acne.

Okay, so not everything in healthcare is low supply. But there are some situations that are okay. One, emergencies are low supply situations. So there, it's low supply because you don't have a lot of time. So it might just be, hey, what's close and what's open? Number two, patented medications, right? So if you have a particular condition where there's only one medication that can treat that and it's on patent, well, then it's very contracted supply because there's only one supplier because of the patent.

Next would be no choice in the providers. For example, the RAPS physicians at a hospital, the radiologist, the anesthesiologist, and the pathologist, especially if they're all part of one group. So there, it's incredibly contracted supply because at that particular location where you've gone for labor and delivery or surgery or what have you, you don't have any options for those folks. Okay, now let's talk about this in very pragmatic terms for an employee health plan. And where are all the costs? The top three cost drivers are cardiovascular, cancer, and orthopedics.

So let's talk about those high cost claimants. Okay, so really I put down orthopedics here as our first priority because essentially that is the easiest one to tackle because it is the one that is least likely to be an emergency, doesn't really have a ton of patented medications on it, and you have choice in your orthopedists. And so, of course, in terms of things like, hey, you need to be able to walk and you want to be free of pain. Okay, so the demand is fairly inelastic, but the point is that the supply is not incredibly contracted.

You have some choices. So as employers and employees, we need to take advantage of those choices. Okay, so that's priority number one. Priority number two is probably cardiovascular. Okay, so in terms of the supply, it's probably pretty contracted because in the majority of cardiovascular high cost claimants, heart attack, stroke, we talked about valvular disease in a previous video, like it's an emergency and you're hemodynamically unstable. So you're not going to go shopping around for a cardiac coordinator bypass graph or a CAP, or you're not going to go shopping around for that.

Right? Okay, however, the way that you would address cardiovascular is through prevention. And this is not just a pipe dream. I mean, I have actually worked with a broker consultant that has a client in Southern California that has a chain of Asian grocery stores, and their per employee per year costs are like $4,000. Okay, and it's a fairly large group, several thousand employees, and it stayed like several thousand dollars, or excuse me, saved like $4,000 for like years, like it hasn't gone up. And they have a very low rate of cardiovascular disease because of their diet and their lifestyle and using primary care.

So I'm not saying it's easy, but I'm also saying that it's not impossible. And it's not done at the time of the heart attack. It's done through prevention. And then finally, the hardest one at the end of the day is cancer. And that's frankly, that's beyond the scope of this video. So prior number one would be ortho, prior number two would be cardiovascular through prevention. And that's the point that I want to make today with inelastic demand. Thank you for watching a healthcare Z..

