Title: Inpatient Psychiatric Care_ Top Diagnoses_ Cost_ Long Wait Times_DeNe9O3EQac
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DeNe9O3EQac
Language: en
Duration: 13:25
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is inpatient psychiatric care. Now, this is a very infrequently talked about topic, but it's super important. In fact, 6.7% of all inpatient admissions at hospitals in America are for inpatient psychiatric care. So it's important for us to talk about it. Now, why would a person, because obviously mental health is a huge challenge for many Americans, but why would a person need to be hospitalized for a psychiatric need? Well, the reason is typically because they're a threat either to themselves or to others.

What are referred to as suicidal or homicidal ideations or even attempts. Now, what are the psychiatric diagnoses that typically lead to threats of people to themselves or to others? Typically, they fall into two broad categories and those are mood disorders and schizophrenia. Now, examples of mood disorders are things like depression and bipolar disorder. And oftentimes, these people will have suicidal ideations, like have thoughts and a plan for killing themselves. Or maybe they've even tried. And also schizophrenia, which is a mental health condition that you're probably very familiar with, it is not multiple personalities, okay? Literally, having multiple personalities is called multiple personality disorder.

It is not schizophrenia. Schizophrenia is characterized by psychosis. And what psychosis is, is a detachment from reality. And so this is, and you can even have depression so bad. It's called depression with psychotic features. So you can be so depressed that you can actually have psychosis. You can be detached from reality. Now, it oftentimes manifests itself as delusions. In other words, thoughts that are not consistent with reality. And also in the form of hallucinations, which can be either visual or auditory, where you see things that are not really there or you hear things that are not really there.

Like a tree or a shrub is talking to you. Now, a cost of an inpatient psychiatric stay on average for a commercially insured American is $9,293. And the average length of stay is about one week. Now, that's the allowed amount. That's not billed charges. So it's about $10,000 and a person stays for about one week. Now, there are severe challenges with inpatient psychiatric care in America in that there are too few beds. There's too few hospitals that provide inpatient psychiatric care. And for the hospitals that do provide inpatient psychiatric care, there's not enough beds for the need.

Now, there has been a dramatic decrease in the number of psychiatric beds in America over the prior several generations. So back in the 1950s, there was 560,000 inpatient psychiatric beds. These were mostly at state-run hospitals because many people back then were forced to be hospitalized if they had schizophrenia. So the point of this video today is not to debate that issue, but just to say, look, the ratio back then was 337 inpatient beds for every 100,000 in the population. Whereas today, there's only about 101,000 inpatient psychiatric beds in all of America.

Obviously, the population of America is much larger now back than it was in the 1950s. And so the number of inpatient psychiatric beds is one-tenth of what it used to be. There's only 30 inpatient psychiatric beds for every 100,000 Americans, where it used to be 337. So it's less than 10% of the number of psychiatric beds. And the problem is, is that not only is it low, it's too low. And it's too low, not only, mainly, like, you know, you can turn a unit within a hospital in a relatively straightforward way into a psychiatric unit.

Oftentimes, the issue is the staff. So you need the psychiatric nurses, you need the psychiatrists, you need the medical assistants and the clerks, et cetera, et cetera. Now, psychiatric nurses are amazing people. Now, oftentimes, psychiatric nurses need to be large men. Because when people are detached from reality in psychosis, sometimes they can lash out and become violent against themselves or violent against other people. And when I did my inpatient psychiatry rotations in medical school, the psych ward did not have security within the ward.

So they would use the staff and the nurses to address any sort of altercation that either between the patients and the staff or among the patients. In fact, literally, on my first day of my inpatient psychiatry rotation, our attending psychiatrist was attacked by a patient. Now, we didn't see it. We were not in the same room with him. But they have a protocol where they tell everybody to go into the nurses' station. And the nurses' stations for psychiatry units typically are completely walled off. This one had the glass walls that had sort of the chicken wire sort of impregnated in it so that if anything was banged against the glass, even if it shattered, the person could not get in through the wiring that was inside of the glass.

So the protocol was for everybody to go in and they called security, but it took like five minutes for security to get there. And a lot can happen in five minutes. And so fortunately, the attending was fairly large and strong himself. And the nurses and the other staff of large men were able to control the patient until the staff got there. And so, I mean, it's a very challenging job. Now, look, it's incredibly important for inpatient psychiatric care, really all psychiatric care, is to separate the person's behavior and their thoughts from the person themselves.

I mean, these are not bad people. They're sick. They have a disease, whether it be depression or bipolar disorder, I mean, schizophrenia, what have you? They have a disease. And our psychiatrist did a great job of teaching us of like, and really through his example of like, not getting mad at these patients. And they would say all sorts of things that might be considered, you know, rude or just downright mean and nasty, or like, you know, spit. I mean, all sorts of stuff that you could be like, well, you know, that's not the right thing to do.

That's not very nice. I feel disrespected. And the psychiatry attending was like, no, no, these people are sick. You wouldn't get mad at somebody if they had cancer. So, like, there's, it makes no sense to get mad at somebody with a, with a, with a, with a psychiatric care. Now, now, in me talking to you here on this video, that's sort of easy to quote unquote conceptualize. But you're, when you're right there in the moment, it's a little harder. You kind of get this like, reaction in your gut where it's like, hey, like, it's not okay to say that.

And so you have to really, you know, you know, learn through, you know, repeated, you know, professional experiences, etc. To really separate the patient from their thoughts and their behavior. And so, same thing for the nurses and the staff and everybody. So, you know, my point of telling the story is, is that at Mass General Brigham, they actually have across their hospital system, they actually have 600 psychiatric beds, but a hundred of them are closed due to lack of staff. And specifically in Massachusetts, that causes huge problems with the wait times for psychiatric care.

So, there's a story of one patient where she had to wait two weeks for inpatient psychiatric care. These people do not wait at home because they have suicidal or homicidal ideations. They need to be hospitalized. And oftentimes they're literally kept on a gurney in the emergency room for like two weeks. Or sometimes they're given like a medical surgical bed in the inpatient floor. So, in fact, in Massachusetts, they, across 50 hospitals in their state, they had 559 borders that were waiting for inpatient psychiatric care.

And across those 50 hospitals where these 559 borders were located, it represented 20% of the inpatient bed, inpatient and ER beds. The point is, is that the backup of these patients, not only was it horrible for them to not be able to get the inpatient psychiatric care they needed, but also they were taking up space in the ER and for inpatient beds that might be necessary for things like COVID or for cancer surgery, etc, etc. So, there was a real problem in Massachusetts. And I'm not picking on Massachusetts.

This is true across the country. Where the hospital had the beds, but they couldn't staff them. And so, therefore, it hurt the patients and it hurt the flow of other patients through the hospital. Now, the question then becomes, why are there so few psychiatric beds? Why are there not enough psychiatric beds? Why aren't they staffing enough psychiatric beds? Well, the reason is, is because psychiatric care in the inpatient setting is very poorly reimbursed. And by very poorly reimbursed, meaning that it doesn't cover the cost of inpatient psychiatric care.

So, one example for a hospital that was interviewed in San Diego said, look, this hospital executive said that they lose 34% on every single inpatient psychiatric admission that they take. Where they get paid about $1,024. And typically, people with psychiatric diagnosis are either self-pay, don't pay at all. The hospital might get a stipend or lump sum payments from the city or the county. A lot of times they're also covered by Medicaid as well. So, it's a combination of Medicaid payments as well. Where the cost, they get reimbursed $1,024.

But on average, it costs them about $1,500 to take care of them. So, they're losing money. So, they look at their different departments or service lines, as they call them. At orthopedics and oncology and psychiatry. And they look at their psychiatry services and they're like, well, we need to decrease our psychiatry services or even eliminate our psychiatry services. Because we're losing so much money on them. Now, this brings me to my final point. At Johns Hopkins, I was fortunate enough when I was there as a resident to be able to hear the CEO speak to kind of a small group of people.

I was kind of standing off to this side. It was kind of just like a circle of like eight or nine people listening to this CEO. He was a radiologist. And he said something that I thought was very interesting. He said, principles aren't principles until they cost you money. Right? A principle requires sacrifice to prove that it's a principle. So, taking care of psychiatric patients is very difficult. You listen, you ask any psychiatrist or any psychiatric nurse, like it's really hard. And not a lot of people want to do it.

So, I mean, just like the law of supply and demand, like you're probably going to have to pay them more to get them to do it. Or you might have to pay a traveling psychiatry nurse if you're not able to staff your psychiatry unit because you're short on nurses. Okay, fine. So, one particular hospital, because they were facing these economic pressures, they reduced, as part of a very large hospital system, but one particular hospital within that hospital system, they reduced their inpatient adult psychiatric beds from 54 to 16, and they reduced their child psychiatry beds from 17 to 9, while at the same time they started a $1 billion private equity fund.

So, like they could have used maybe some of the money from that private equity fund to keep it at 54, or maybe even expand the number of beds. You know, likewise, Mass General, again, I'm not picking on Mass General Brigham, but they're doing a $2 billion building campaign. I mean, they could take some of that $2 billion and go out and hire the nurses to open up those 100 beds that they've got closed right now. So, it's really a question of principles and priorities. And this hospital system down here, their mission statement is to provide service to all people with special attention paid to those who are poor and vulnerable.

Well, listen, psychiatric patients are oftentimes poor and vulnerable. So, if they are in keeping with the hospital's mission statement, well then, it seems to me not necessarily the case that they are prioritizing their budget in keeping with their mission. And so, the reason I bring up that final point is because inpatient psychiatric stays are a perfect example of that Andrew Carnegie adage that I've said before, which is, don't listen to what people say, watch what they do. So, people say, well, healthcare is under, you know, it's confusing.

Who knew it was so confusing? Healthcare becomes much less confusing and it becomes much more clear when instead of listening to what people say or to what, you know, mission statements on websites, instead to watch what people within healthcare do and you get a much better understanding of what's going on. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

