Title: Insurance Carriers Want Medicare-For-All to Happen_KU4Tsu19uiA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KU4Tsu19uiA
Language: en
Duration: 2:43
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing will Medicare for All happen? Well, it will if insurers want it to happen. Now, that's a potential thesis that we're going to discuss today. Now, what I have here is my beautiful drawing of a graph from a Commonwealth Fund study. Now, it shows revenue for the five largest health insurers in America, right? So, Cigna, Aetna, United, Anthem, and Humana. They insure 125 million Americans, which, oh, by the way, is 43% of the entire insured population in America.

And they looked at, okay, well, how much revenue for these five largest insurers was coming from their commercial customers, in other words, employers, whether it be from premiums or from ASO services, and then also comparing that to from government programs like Medicare and Medicaid. So, you can see here in 2010, on the bottom, with the dots, we have the commercial income at $117 billion, and then we have the Medicare and Medicaid revenue at $93 billion. Now, notice, in 2014, the commercial income went up a little, it's $136 billion, and the Medicare and Medicaid revenue went up to $168 billion.

Now, in 2016, the commercial revenue is now at $148 billion, and the government program revenue, Medicare and Medicaid, is now $213 billion. Okay, notice here, the bottom parts of the bars have not gone up very much. In fact, they've gone up 26%. Notice the top part of the bars have gone up a lot. They have gone up 129%. Notice in 2010, government programs were the minority of the five largest health insurance revenue. Now, in 2016, it is by far much larger than commercial insurance revenue. So, it's like, this is like the new thing.

The new thing is the government programs for these insurers. Like, if you were the CEO of one of these companies, like, where is your future? Where's the future of your business? Is it in the bottom row, or is it in the top row? And so, that's my point for today, that the future growth of insurance carrier revenue is in government programs. So, like, to a certain extent, all of the rhetoric that we hear in the news, it's very important to understand who benefits, and who benefits from what outcome. So, maybe Medicare for all is going to happen because the insurance carriers want it to happen.

And that's really my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

