Title: Insurance Company Denials_8Y1aTOuNzZw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Y1aTOuNzZw
Language: en
Duration: 3:43
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and welcome to A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing denials. So a denial is non-payment by an insurance carrier for a service that a patient receives. And so there's a variety of reasons for this. So reason number one is a non-covered service. And so this is where the insurance policy just might not pay for that sort of thing. So a good example, that might be like LASIK eye surgery. So the person might go to the ophthalmologist and have that done for vision correction, but it's just a non-covered service.

Your insurance doesn't pay for that. And there's lots of different types of non-covered services. Plastic surgery might be another example of that. Next is no prior authorization or what's sometimes called a pre-certification. So the insurance company will actually require certain tests or procedures. They need to be notified and they need to approve that it's okay to be done in advance before they'll pay for it. So that might be for an MRI or an echocardiogram or for an orthopedic surgery. And so that MRI or scan or what have you might be completely appropriate, but you actually have to do that prior authorization first.

And if it's not done first, then it will be denied. And it's typically the doctor's office and or the hospital that is responsible for obtaining the prior authorization from the insurance carrier. And last is medical policy, which is a very specific term that says that your insurance only covers medical tests and procedures in certain situations. And those quote unquote certain situations are very lengthy. It's like an 80 to 100 page document. So it might say, okay, for something like a pulmonary function test, our medical policy is that there are four CPT codes associated with this pulmonary function test, which is a breathing test for someone with, let's say, asthma.

And we as an insurance company, we will pay for three of those four CPT codes, but we won't pay for this fourth CPT code. Now that medical policy might actually be different across different insurance carriers. And so it's very common for that pulmonary function test example for other insurance carriers to actually pay for all four CPT codes, whereas that one insurance carrier would only pay for one. Another example for medical policy would be if there's only certain types of procedures that are allowed with certain types of diagnoses.

So for example, I've worked with a member in the past who had an in-office laser procedure on their retina by an ophthalmologist because they had a certain diagnosis. And then the insurance company then denied that because the laser procedure was not part of their medical policy for that particular diagnosis of the disease of their retina. Now, a couple things to note about all these denials. One, whenever anyone goes in for medical service at the doctor's office or the hospital, everyone signs something that says that the patient is ultimately financially responsible for their care.

So in other words, they'll bill the insurance company, but if the insurance denies, then it's ultimately the patient's responsibility. So right, wrong, or indifferent, just know that almost everybody signs something like that when they go in for medical service, right? There's a gazillion pieces of paper that you sign when you go in. That's one of those pieces of paper. And then number two, if there's a denial, you can appeal it. Now typically, non-covered services do not have successful appeals, but oftentimes prior authorization and medical policy denials can be appealed.

And there's three different levels of appeals. First, second, and third level appeals. So the point there is, is that if it gets denied on the first level appeal, go ahead and do a second level appeal. And if the second level appeal is denied, you can go ahead and do a third level appeal. And so with that, we'll conclude the session for today. Thank you so much for watching..

