Title: Intermountain Announces Spin Off Castell_0nAfoj3PANw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nAfoj3PANw
Language: en
Duration: 5:05
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing a press release from Intermountain Healthcare about a new spinoff that they have just created called Castell. So this was literally just announced on July 16th of 2019. So this is very new. There's an article about it in Modern Healthcare as well. And I'll post a link both to the new company and to the Modern Health article in the show notes. Okay, what is Castell? It is a value-based care spinoff, like I said, of Intermountain Health.

Now, Intermountain Health, I have spoken about this healthcare system multiple times in previous videos about how effective they are at increasing quality and decreasing costs for their planned members in the Salt Lake City, Utah area. Okay, so how do they do this? How do they increase the value-based care? It's through reimagined primary care. So they really use that primary care physician as the first-line interaction with patients. And what is the result of that medical home amazing primary care model that they have? And again, I've talked about that in a previous video.

I'll leave a link to that in the show notes as well. As a result, they have decreased by 60% Medicare Advantage hospitalizations. They have decreased by 25% commercial insurance patient hospitalizations. They have decreased by 20% per member per month costs. Okay, if those numbers are real and if they can be replicated, that is huge. That is amazing. Now, what does Castell do? It has reimagined primary care. They're going to partner with stakeholders, right, which can be doctors and hospitals and insurance carriers and self-funded employer plans, etc., etc.

Okay, but they specifically have software that's an analytics platform to guide care and they have digital tools that can integrate virtual care, member experience or patient experience and social determinants of health. In other words, if you were an employer or you were an employee benefits broker or if you were a consultant, you would be able to take your claims data. Now, Intermountain Healthcare is using data from their own hospital system to run through this software. But listen, within the medical records department of Intermountain Health, they have to roll up all of their services into billing codes to then bill insurance carriers, yada, yada, yada.

So, to a certain extent, that software might have the capability of being applied to claims data. So, if you could do that, if you could do that to your own claims data, then you could identify the specific problems within your health plan by member in regards to diabetes or orthopedic issues or cardiovascular risk issues or in terms of cancer risk issues. Okay, so you would know specifically what your problems were. Not only would you know what your problems were, you would know who specifically had them and you would be able to know when and where to apply an intervention.

Okay, so literally, Castell gets you like 80% the way there. Okay, the final 20% is huge and that final 20% is the actual behavior change by the patient or the plan member or the employees themselves. Okay, so at Intermountain, they could do that because they have a captive audience in the patients of the Intermountain Healthcare System. So, if you were to apply this to an employer plan, then you'd have to go through that BJ Fogg behavior change model of behavior change is the intersection of motivation, ability, and trigger.

But that's exactly the area of expertise for employee benefits managers and HR and brokers and consultants. So, if you took the software and then used the broker consultant or the employer to then act as the change agent with the people, then, I mean, literally, this prints money. And I don't mean prints money in like a greedy way. I mean, it just wrings so much waste out of healthcare delivery. It would be unbelievable. I mean, 20% decrease per member per month. I mean, that is unbelievable. Like, okay, so finally, where would you start with this? I would tell you you would start in an environment where the patients actually have the expectation they're going to be told what to do.

And you also have the financial plan levers to actually make that happen. Where does that exist? In an HMO. In an HMO. So, if you have an employee plan with an HMO option or you're a health insurance company with an HMO option, I'm not giving you the keys to the castle. Because if you are able to apply this software to an HMO population, then it's it. To a certain extent, you've solved the healthcare value problem. Now, of course, this is all in theory and we all have to make it happen. But this is a super exciting announcement by Intermountain Health about Castell.

And I thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

