Title: Intercompany Eliminations_  Secret to Health Insurance Company Profits_wu-RhIxCUkA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wu-RhIxCUkA
Language: en
Duration: 6:23
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is intercompany eliminations. The secret to insurance carrier profits. That's right. Today, I'm going to go over some accounting. So of course, we talk about healthcare finance here on A Healthcare Z. We have to talk about accounting, but this is super important. So it involves numbers. Please pay attention. Intercompany eliminations is where revenue from a subsidiary of one company cannot be counted as revenue again when another subsidiary of the same company does the services for subsidiary A.

In other words, subsidiary A sold to subsidiary B. So subsidiary A is the customer of subsidiary B. You can't sell to yourself and count the revenue twice. So let's use a specific example involving UnitedHealth Group because they do it as do the other health insurance companies. So in the case of UnitedHealth Group, they've got UnitedHealthcare, the insurance company, and then they have Optum, which is the healthcare services quote unquote arm of UnitedHealth Group. Now, let's say there was no intercompany elimination.

So let's just say you're talking about UnitedHealthcare, the health insurance company. And let's say they get $10,000 of premium for one particular individual. So then per the medical loss ratio, they need to spend $8,500 out in medical care for that individual, which would then leave $1,500 remaining in non-medical care that UnitedHealthcare can retain. Now let's say they had $1,000 of expenses for paying their salespeople and commissions and adjudication and blah, blah, blah. So then you would take the $1,500 minus the $1,000, so that would leave you a final profit of $500 off the $10,000 of revenue of premium.

And you didn't break the medical loss ratio because you were still spending $8,500 on medical care for that premium. Okay, fine. However, this is what UnitedHealth Group actually does. So in the case of an intercompany elimination, again, let's say UnitedHealthcare is getting $10,000 of premium for an individual and they're spending $8,500 in medical care. But hypothetically, let's say that that $8,500 for doctor's visits and going to see the, you know, having an imaging done or having a procedure at an ASC or having home healthcare or even their, you know, specialty pharmacy services and the PBM.

So all that money is spent out, but that $8,500 isn't going to random hospitals and Dr. Joe and Dr. Smith. They're going all to Optum, right? Because remember that Optum employs thousands of physicians. They run the entire Kelsey Siebold healthcare system in Houston that has hospitals and ambulatory surgery centers and all sorts of stuff. Okay. So let's just say hypothetically that all of that $8,500 goes to Optum for the medical care. Now, the intercompany elimination is, well, you can't count the $10,000 of revenue of premium to UHC plus another $8,500 of revenue for Optum.

You can't count $18,500 in revenue because you'd be essentially double counting the revenue. So that's why you have to do an intercompany elimination. However, let's see what Optum then can do with that $8,500 in medical care. So let's say to actually deliver care for that individual, it only costs $6,500 of expenses. That means that they have $2,000 of profit off the $8,500. Now, the medical loss ratio only applies to UHC. The medical loss ratio does not apply to Optum. So in this case, the $2,000 of profit can be added to the $500 of profit for UHC.

And now you have $2,500 of profit off of $10,000 of premium. So in other words, it is in more than the medical loss ratio. So United Health Group and intercompany eliminations have completely gone around the medical loss ratio by being vertically integrated. And it's totally legal. And all the other carriers do it as well. So the Cigna Group does it. In 2023, they created the quote unquote Cigna Group. It's not even called Cigna Healthcare anymore. It's the Cigna Group. Why? Because the Cigna Group is following the same game plan as the United Health Group.

They've got Cigna Healthcare, which is the health insurance company. And then they've got Evernorth, which is the healthcare services arm where they can do the intercompany eliminations. Next, we have Elevance. That used to be Anthem. Guess what? They still have Anthem. That's the health insurance company. And then the healthcare services side of it is called CareLon, which they can then do intercompany eliminations with. And then CVS Health also has Aetna, which is the health insurance company. And then they have the other subsidiaries like CVS Caremark and their CVS Pharmacies.

And there are Minute Clinics, which are actually providers. And again, they can do the intercompany eliminations there as well. So what this means is, is that the health insurance companies are highly incentivized to, if I'm a shareholder of a health insurance company, I want the expenses for the provision of care to go down as much as possible. But I want the amount of payment from the health insurance side over to the healthcare services side. In other words, it's $8,500 here. I want that to be as high as possible.

So given that, that this is not going to change, okay? Is this right? Is this wrong? Like, I'm not here to debate that, okay? Actually, my point is, is that hospitals better get in on this. As a hospital, you better start, frankly, copying this. Because if you don't, United Health Group and Cigna and Elevance and CVS are going to eat, they're already eating your lunch and they're going to eat your lunch even more. So that's my point for the day. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

