Title: Medicare Advantage Overpayments_SCbf1sLU8RY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SCbf1sLU8RY
Language: en
Duration: 12:47
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is government overpayment to Medicare Advantage plans. Now, this is an extremely important topic. It has been in the news a lot, but there's sort of a twist to it that at the end will probably make you somewhat angry at me. So hold on to your hats. So CMS, which is the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, which actually oversees the payments to Medicare Advantage plans as well, uses a risk score, risk adjustment methodology when they're paying out to the private commercial Medicare Advantage plans, which are United has them, various Blue Cross plans have them, including Anthem, Cignet has them, CBS Aetna has them.

There's gobs of other small ones across the country as well. Centene has a whole bunch of them. Okay, so let me give you an example of how this risk adjustment works. So let's say the base rate for a Medicare Advantage beneficiary is $1,000 a month. And then the health insurance company has to go out and then pay the hospitals and the docs and take care of all of the health care payments for that individual for that $1,000 a month. Okay, so, but it depends upon how sick they are. So if there is a 77-year-old female with congestive heart failure and diabetes, she gets a risk score or a risk adjustment of 1.344, which she then multiplied by the base rate of 1,000, which means that that Medicare Advantage plan, instead of getting $1,000 a month, gets $1,344 a month.

Now, it works in the opposite direction as well. If it's a 65-year-old man who's like completely healthy, then his risk adjustment score is 0.4. So you take the 0.4 times the 1,000. So the Medicare Advantage plan would only get $400 a month for this gentleman. Because obviously, somebody who's older and has two chronic diseases is more likely to have a lot more health care expenses than somebody who's younger and is completely healthy. That's why they do this risk adjustment. Now, the challenge has been, and what has been in the news a lot, is that the Medicare Advantage plans obviously are financially incentivized to capture as many diseases as possible for their beneficiaries and make them appear as severe as possible so that they can increase the payments that they receive from CMS.

And so the Department of Justice has actually sued Cigna and Anthem. And there have been the Department of Health and Human Services, the Office of the Inspector General has gone after these plans as well. So there's been a variety of actions by the federal government against these Medicare Advantage plans for essentially gaming the system so that they get paid more for essentially exaggerating how sick their beneficiaries are. Okay, so fine. You would think that CMS would do this themselves. That wouldn't CMS do their own audits? The answer is yes, they do.

And in fact, CMS, the most recent audit by CMS is for the 2011 to 2013 payments. What's that called? A decade ago. The most recent CMS audits are from a decade ago. Now, those audits found, now they don't audit every single payment to every single Medicare Advantage plan, but those audits found $12 million of overpayments to about 18,000 beneficiaries. Now, keep in mind, there's almost 30 million Medicare Advantage beneficiaries. So that is an infinitely small number that they sampled. Okay, so fine. So they extrapolated it out and they're saying, okay, well, Medicare Advantage most likely overpaid by $650 million during that time period.

Okay, so fine. That doesn't seem to be like a very large amount of money. That doesn't seem to be like very big news. In my opinion, the biggest thing about the news is that the most recent audit was from 10 years ago. You would think they would do it more frequently. But it gets more interesting. The only reason we know about this is because the Kaiser Family Foundation issued a Freedom of Information Act request to get this information from CMS, which CMS ignored. They wouldn't release it. They wouldn't release their own audit information.

Huh. You would think in this world of transparency that CMS would, like, happily show this audit that they've done. It shows that they've identified these overpayments. That's good, right? They should have to show it, right? The Kaiser Family Foundation had to sue CMS in order to get this information. In order to get CMS to cooperate with the Freedom of Information Act request, the Kaiser Family Foundation had to sue CMS. The lawsuit took three years and just got settled, which is why we just got this information now in the fall of 2022.

So why? So why? Why is it so hard to get this information out of the government's own audits about the government actually regulating or controlling or, like, counting the dollars and the pennies to make sure that the money going out is being spent appropriately? Well, it could just be that CMS is incompetent or maybe CMS doesn't want, well, it's pretty obvious CMS doesn't want people to know. Maybe CMS doesn't want to do the audits. Oh, by the way, not only has this happened 10 years ago, CMS has done nothing about it, okay? In fact, they were going to do something about it this fall, and they delayed it yet again until 2023.

They're finally going to do something about this audit. They've never done anything about the $650 million, okay? And the article, which I'll leave a link to in the show notes, talks about how there's going to be this huge battle over the extrapolation methodologies, because obviously the insurance carriers, Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna, they don't like the extrapolation methodology. But the point of this video is, like, why has it taken 10 years? Why didn't CMS ever release it? And why did Kaiser Family Foundation have to sue CMS in order to get this information? It appears to me as though CMS doesn't want to do the audits and doesn't want to do anything about it.

Have they been too busy for 10 years? Probably not. So they probably just don't want to do anything about it. Okay, this has happened while the Department of Health and Human Services oversees CMS. Okay, this has occurred under, I mean, shoot, 2011, 2013. We have had both Republican and Democratic presidential administrations in charge of the Department of Health and Human Services. This has occurred under both parties. And it takes me back to a conversation that I had when I was in medical school, because I'm like, okay, maybe I want to get into healthcare policy.

So actually, I'm from Washington, D.C. originally. So when I was home on break one time, the Robert Wood Johnson has a special fellowship program in Washington, D.C. And one of my professors in medical school had done this fellowship. And he's like, oh, it's an amazing experience. And he actually introduced me to the woman who was running the fellowship. So as a medical student, I actually went to her office to talk to her. Be like, tell me about this fellowship. I know I'm too young for it now, but I would kind of like to learn about it.

Maybe it's something I'd want to do later on. And it would be a fascinating conversation. She was very generous with her time. And she said, look, nothing happens. And she said a whole bunch of great stuff. But one of the things that she educated me about was she said, listen, nothing in healthcare and health policy happens in Washington, D.C. without AARP. And I'm kind of scratching my head. You're like, not the American Medical Association, not the American Hospital Association, not America's Health Insurance Plans, AIP, which is the lobbying organization for, you know, Blue Cross United and all the health insurance plans.

So in other words, it's AARP. And she's like, oh, yeah, nothing happens in Washington about healthcare without AARP. And so isn't that interesting? Isn't that interesting that AARP is also a huge beneficiary of Medicare Advantage plans? In fact, AARP receives a billion dollars a year in royalties from endorsing various products and services. In fact, AARP only receives $300 million a year in dues from its members. So in other words, its royalty payments from endorsements are three times more than the dues from its members.

And specifically for healthcare products and services, in just one year alone, the most recent year, I think it was 2020 that we have the numbers for, they received $752 million in royalty payments from the likes of other groups as well. But one of the biggest ones is UnitedHealthcare, right? Because when you get a UnitedHealthcare Medicare Advantage plan, it's got a huge old AARP. It almost looks like an AARP Medicare Advantage plan. It almost doesn't even look like a Medicare. It doesn't even look like a United plan.

It says a Medicare Advantage plan from AARP. Underwritten by UnitedHealthcare Health Insurance Company, right? So it's got AARP's name all over it. And AARP makes a lot of money. So to a certain extent, if AARP has any influence on CMS and keeping this Medicare Advantage graft quiet, that would be an AARP's, to their advantage, okay? AARP is financially incentivized to not have CMS audits come out. Now, were they involved in it? I have no clue. I'm just saying they're financially incentivized for the audit information to not come out.

Okay, now, overall, why does this even matter? Look, Medicare Advantage has 29 million members now. It is 49%. It's essentially half of everybody with Medicare in America. Half of people with Medicare in America have traditional Medicare, and the other half have Medicare Advantage. And that other half that had Medicare Advantage, it's been exploding. In 2013, so like nine years ago, it was 25%. Now, it's 49%. So it's basically like doubled, okay? So it's growing at like 7% per year. And it's expected to keep going.

It's not stopping anytime soon. So more people in America are going to have Medicare Advantage plans than traditional Medicare. Now, the problem is is that Medicare Advantage is actually more expensive for Medicare. All those payments that CMS pays to the health insurance company with all these risk adjustment scores ends up being about $7 billion more than traditional Medicare in 2019. Again, I'll leave a link in the show notes to where this data is from. So, okay, so fine. You know, we throw numbers like trillions around when we talk about the government now.

But what's a billion here, a billion there? Like, who cares, right? So the Medicare Part A trust fund for hospital payments, it's going to run out in six short years in 2028. And so by having more people on Medicare Advantage plans and having those Medicare Advantage plans be more expensive and having questionable risk adjustment methodology for making those plans more expensive than they should be because you're making patients appear sicker than they actually are, all that's going to do is hasten the expenditure of the Medicare trust fund.

And we're going to run out of money sooner. So I'm not... What's the punchline in this video? I'm not expecting anything to change. Like, I want you to be aware of this. I want you to be aware that, in my opinion, going forward in the near future, none of this is going to change. The risk adjustment methodology? Not going to change. The fact that it's hard to get the information out of the government? Not going to change. Like, it's not going to change until there's a crisis. I mean, we just had an election here.

Did you know that the re-election rate for this past election for the House of Representatives? 95%. Did you know that the re-election rate for the House of Representatives is, like, about 90% to 95%? Like, every single two years going back to the 1960s? I mean, almost the most stable job in America is being a congressman. Like, your chances of being re-elected are super high, right? So, what's my point? My point is, is that there's no crisis. People aren't calling for change. People aren't voting for change.

Everything's just kind of going along. I'm not, listen, I'm not saying that's right or that's wrong. I'm just saying this is what's happening. And, you know, maybe in 2028, when there is a crisis, you know, Rahm Emanuel was famous for saying, never let a crisis go to waste, so maybe this will change in six years. But in the meantime, the Medicare Advantage gravy train is just going to keep on rolling. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

