Title: Medicare Inpatient Only List Explained_wQRA2kekuV4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wQRA2kekuV4
Language: en
Duration: 11:54
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the inpatient only list explained. Now, this video is super nuanced, but it's also super important. So I urge you to pay extra attention to what I'm about to go through. So there is a rule by Medicare, CMS, that says that there are only certain procedures that must be done on an inpatient basis. And that list of procedures is about 1,800 codes. And it tends to be for more complex surgeries like coronary artery bypass grafts, where CMS is like, look, these are very invasive procedures.

And so they require what's called the two midnight rule, where the patient has to stay for two midnights in order for this surgery to be done. So it has to be done as an inpatient and it has to be done at a hospital. Because by definition, you can't do it at an ambulatory surgery center because you don't do inpatient two midnight procedures at an ambulatory surgery center. But there was a huge change in 2021 when CMS started removing procedures from the inpatient list. And in fact, it removed 298 codes that year.

And every year they make changes. So in 2024, they removed more. And then sometimes like new procedures are created, like, you know, doctors are like, hey, we're going to do this new procedure, yada, yada, yada. So sometimes new procedures are added to the inpatient list. Okay. Now there are 6,000 ambulatory surgery centers in America. So it affects a huge number of facilities because if a procedure falls off the inpatient only list, then it can be done at an ASC. And that's a huge deal because then an ASC that is potentially not owned by a hospital system can do these procedures and they can compete with the hospitals.

So in effect, procedures coming off the inpatient only list is like bad for hospital systems, right? Hospital systems are like, no, we want things on the inpatient only list. That way we can continue to have control over these procedures. But if it falls off the inpatient only list, well then shoot, then all these ASCs that pop up, they can compete with us and they can steal away our patients and do these procedures as an outpatient at an ASC. So let's get into the details specifically of where these regulations lie.

Where is this list? So the changes occur on the hospital outpatient prospective payment and ASC payment rule. I can't even say it. Guess what? It's 646 pages long. I will leave a link in the video description. Okay. It is officially for 2024. It is officially referred to as CMS rule 1786 FC. Now the list itself is found on addendum E. Okay. So if you're like, oh, I can just Google CMS impatient only list and that will just tell me, right? Believe me, it is not that easy. Maybe I was just being dense, but it literally took me over an hour and a half to specifically find addendum E that actually has the inpatient list.

Okay. So drum roll, please. Here's the actual URL. It's cms.gov slash node slash one, two, seven, five, eight, four, one. Only in America would they make the CMS inpatient only list, which is hugely impactful in healthcare finance. So incredibly difficult to find with an incredibly like abstract URL name. And when you look at it, okay, so fine. You, so you go to that, you click it, it gives you this Excel spreadsheet and it gives you all the codes for the inpatient only list. Aha. It does not give you some like easy to understand list of like, okay, well, what used to be on the inpatient only list, but now you can do as an outpatient, like that list of what you can do as an outpatient.

Now, that would be helpful. Okay. That list does exist, but you have to pay for it. So literally the American college of physician advisors. So if you go to ACP advisors website, you can, if you become a member and you pay $295, which I did just so that I could gain access to this list. And guess what? When you gain access to this list, it expressly says, you cannot share this list on the internet. Okay. So I know what specifically is on this list, but I can't share it because I had to pay $295 for it. So you can either search for the list, which only gives you the inpatient list, but you want to know, okay, well, what can you actually do it in ASC? Well, then you got to pay the $295 to actually figure that out.

Okay. What is the financial implication of this, uh, of this inpatient list of procedures coming off of the inpatient list? Well, two of the largest hospital systems in America are essentially, are essentially betting their future on it. Okay. So like I said, the, the, the hospital systems, like they don't want to do a procedures outpatient. They would prefer to do them inpatient, but because this inpatient list has changed. They're like, Oh shoot, we better build a whole bunch of ASCs so that we don't lose this outpatient surgery, um, volume to competition.

So hospital corporation America, by far the largest hospital, um, corporation in America has 124 ASCs. They have planned to dramatically increase that number in an outpatient procedures represent 38% of their revenue and it is growing. The second largest hospital system, uh, uh, commercially traded, uh, hospital system in America is tenant, which bought us surgical partners, international USPI several years ago for billions of dollars and USPI now in Q3 of 24, 24 made up $941 million. And just one quarter alone made up almost a billion dollars of tenants revenue, which for that quarter was $5.1 billion.

Okay. So the ASC revenue alone was almost 20% of tenants revenue. And it's the fastest growing segment of tenants revenue. It was up 17% year over year. Okay. So in fact, uh, ambulatory surgery centers and outpatient procedures are such a big deal. That's 71%. The vast majority of hospital systems of America are making investments into ambulatory surgery centers. In fact, tenant is making $250 million a year of investments in ambulatory surgery centers. Okay. So why, why is this? Is it because of some sort of new technology? Is it because of patient demand? No, it was because of the Medicare inpatient only list rule change.

And as Medicare goes, that's how the commercial insurance goes as well. So all these hospital systems are now either employing orthopedic surgeons and other, uh, doctors that perform surgery, or they're entering into joint ventures so that they can share in that ambulatory surgery center revenue with the surgeons. When it was on the inpatient only list, the hospital can't share the inpatient revenue with the doctors. That's against the Stark law. But with an ASC, there is an, there is a safe harbor to the Stark law.

So the hospital systems or the independent, uh, company that owns the ASCs, they can actually share revenue with the doctors. And that's a huge deal. And that's why all of this patient volume is now going to the ASCs because it allows the physicians to make more money because they can share in the ASC revenue and they couldn't share in the inpatient revenue. Okay. Now, what does this mean for employer sponsored health plans? Okay. All these hospital systems are building all of these ASCs so that the ASCs can be under the very expensive hospital system contract, very high reimbursement rates, right? Whereas, so if you're self-funded though, you don't want that.

You're like, okay, great. So now it's done an ASC instead of a hospital, but it's still under the hospital's contract. So it still might be a 30, 40, $70,000 procedure, even though it's done on an outpatient basis instead of inpatient. So it's still expensive. Don't think that hospital ASC based procedures are inexpensive. They're still run through the hospital systems contract and they are still very expensive. So what's the alternative? The alternative is that if you're self-funded, you can direct contract with an independent ASC that tends to be much less expensive.

In fact, there are ASCs that offer cash prices. So, and physicians can own these ASCs. Again, there's a, there's a safe harbor to, uh, the Stark law that says that physicians can own ASCs. Only physicians that practice at ASCs can, can, can own ASCs. Okay. Me as an internist, I don't practice in an ASC. I don't do procedures. I cannot be a partial owner of an ASC. It's against the law, but, uh, a pain, uh, management specialist that owns an ASC can, can, uh, a pain management specialist that does procedures in an ASC.

They can own an ASC. A surgeon, an OBGYN, um, uh, gastroenterologist. They all perform procedures at ASCs and they can be partial owners of ASCs. And so it actually is a fantastic opportunity to actually the lower the cost of health care while maintaining or even improving the quality with these physician owned independent ASCs that are not a part of a hospital system. Let me give you a specific example. There is a physician owned ASC in a suburb of Dallas, Texas that is called the North Texas Team Care ASC.

I have no financial connection with them. Now I know the Dr. Kakiri who founded this thing and they have cash pricing. They do a total knee arthroplasty on an outpatient basis for $20,000. That includes the preoperative visit. It includes the surgeon's fee. It includes the facility fee. It includes the anesthesiologist fee and it includes all the supplies, et cetera, et cetera, for the actual procedure itself. $20,000. Okay. The in network allowed amount for total knee arthroplasties, total knee replacements is upwards of $70,000.

That could be done as an outpatient through a hospital system. So literally through a non-hospital system based ASC, it can cost $50,000 less. If your business has a 10% profit margin, that means that you need to sell an extra half a million dollars of revenue. You have to bring in an extra half a million dollars of revenue just to pay for what it's going to cost you to have one of your employees get their knee surgery done at a hospital system ASC versus at an independent ASC. So if anything, the fact that the inpatient only list is actually changing and more procedures can be done on an outpatient basis and paid for by Medicare is actually pro competitive.

And it's actually good for employer sponsored plans if they self fund and they direct contract with an independent ASC. So after watching this video, the very first question you need to ask your broker is, what can we do to set up an independent direct contract with an ASC? Because that could actually save you $500,000 of revenue a year because of what you save on that one surgery. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

