Title: Medicare Payments to Doctors_ Medicare Paid One Doctor _5.8 Million in Just One Year_1mbqtxP9P5A
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1mbqtxP9P5A
Language: en
Duration: 8:50
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A HealthCare Z. Today we're going to be discussing Medicare payments by specific physician. So the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid released exact dollar amounts that they paid to physicians for 2012 through 2015 and the Wall Street Journal created a fantastic searchable database of this data. And so we're going to take a look at that and see how that applies to employer sponsored health plans. Now, first of all, it's called Medicare en masse and you can see here that you can actually look it up by a specific doctor name.

Now I can tell you that you will not find me on here because I stopped practicing in 2010. So it starts with 2012. So if you look me up, I actually will not be on here. I worked as a hospitalist. Okay. Now you can also look it up by specific city or by state. So you can just see the highest reimbursed physicians. by Medicare. And so let's start in Dallas because that's where A HealthCare Z is located. And so the very first one is LabCorp. Now we don't want to look at like large organizations like LabCorp because a bunch of physicians, you know, order from that particular place.

But what we want to do is we want to look at specific physicians names. If we come down here, we'll see that the first one of the first individually named physicians is Dr. Russell Lamb. Russell Lamb and he billed $5.7 million and was paid $5.7 million from Medicare. And look at that 5.8, 6.3, 4.7. He's been getting a lot of money from Medicare for a long time. Okay. Now that is the hundredth percentile for Medicare reimbursement. That is the top of the top. What is he doing to garner such reimbursement? He is doing vascular interventions.

And what I mean by that is a catheter is stuck through the groin into the arteries of the legs for blocked arteries in the legs or narrowed arteries in the legs. It's referred to as peripheral vascular disease. He's opening up the blockages and he's putting in stents. Now, is he doing that to like everybody who he sees? Is he doing it to too many people? Is he doing it to too few people? I don't know. But I do know that for 122 Medicare patients, he did it 176 times. So he did it even like more than once. And then on 136, and that was for stents.

And then for 136 Medicare folks, he did it 194 times where he just used balloon angioplasty to open it up. And he was getting paid on average $5,000 to $8,000 per procedure. And you can see that those procedures made up the vast majority of his reimbursement from Medicare. Okay. So is that too much? Is that too little? I don't know. But I can tell you it's a lot. Now, next up, we have Dr. Lori Kors. She's actually an ophthalmologist. So she's not doing a procedure like that. But what she's doing is she's injecting medication into the eye.

And that medication is incredibly expensive. It's about $1,000 to $2,000 a pop. But for 277, excuse me, 227 Medicare patients, she injected over 2,040 injections. So that's like almost 10 injections per patient within one year. Now, again, that's like the 99th percentile. Is that too much? Is that too little? I don't know. But it's a lot compared to her peers. Now, next up, we have Dr. Charles Cowie. Look, he got $3 million for Medicare. That's the 98th percentile. All right. What does he do? As an oncologist, he treats melanoma and kidney cancer, renal cell carcinoma.

And he has a medication that he's giving via chemotherapy in the office that's called Yervoy. And that Yervoy is incredibly expensive. Like each vial is like $8,000 a vial. And you use upwards of like 10 to 14 vials per chemotherapy session. And you're doing each chemotherapy session like every like four to eight weeks. So if you run the math on that, and I'll even look in the show notes, he only had 26 patients that he did this on. He built almost $2 million on just 26 patients, right? And he did 18,714 quote unquote treatments.

Now, there's no way he did that many quote unquote chemotherapy infusions on 26 people, right? That's crazy. But even if you, even if it's 18,714, let's just say that was vials, vials of the medication, that even if you were giving some of the highest doses recommended for that chemotherapy, it would still only get you up to like 1,400 vials. So I'm not sure how he got to 18,000. That is a mystery to me. But you can see here we have vascular procedures, we have ophthalmologists for eye injections, and we have chemotherapy by oncologists.

Now, that's in Dallas. Let's check out some other cities. Okay, so in Houston, we find the same thing. Look, ophthalmology, ophthalmology, ophthalmology. In New York City, we see the same thing. Hematology, oncology, hematology, oncology, ophthalmology, ophthalmology. Cardiology, and sometimes they're doing vascular procedures like the vascular surgeon. Okay, Chicago, look at that. They do more hematology, oncology in the top here, right? Again, these are just the top physicians billing anywhere from $6 to $1.8 million to Medicare.

So these are like the highest billers of the highest billers. And lastly, in Atlanta, you can see ophthalmology, ophthalmology, ophthalmology, ophthalmology. Okay, so what's my point? My point is for you as a self-funded employer, you can actually look up the same type of physician-specific payment data on your claims. So just like here we have it for Medicare, you can look at it for your claims. And that gives you a tremendous idea in terms of volume. And in terms of like where to start looking, you can start looking on some of these doctors that do high volumes of Medicare.

Because if they're doing high volumes of Medicare, they might be doing high volumes of commercially insured patients as well. Now, it's also important to note that there is stratification. In other words, it's not all doctors are billing a lot. It's that some doctors are billing infinitely more than the vast majority. So you really want to look at those top percentile of doctors that are doing tons and tons of billing. Okay, so fine. So it's concentrated in a handful of doctors. Those doctors are not spread across a whole bunch of different specialties.

They're in concentrated specialties. They're in oncology. And they're not just all over oncology. They're highly concentrated in even certain treatments. One of which is Nulasta, which is an injection that is given to boost your white blood cell count after chemotherapy. And another is that Yervoy, which is that medication that is used to treat the melanoma and the kidney cancer. And then for vascular procedures, it's for peripheral vascular disease and stenting. And then for ophthalmology, it's for those eye injections for Ilea and Lucentis.

So, okay. So it is a small number of doctors. But those small number of doctors are also concentrated over a small number of specialties. And they're concentrated over a small number of procedures or medications. So this is highly, highly concentrated. What are the implications for an employer-sponsored health plan? These folks need to be investigated. Is what they're doing right? Is what they're doing wrong? I don't know. That's what I'm saying. But what I am saying is that what they're doing is different. And if what they're doing is different, then I would argue it involves, it needs to be investigated.

Why is it different? Is it because they're so much better? Maybe they're 100 times better than everybody else, and that's why they get the volume. Or maybe there's something about the way that they practice that makes them drive such enormous volume. I don't know. It needs to be investigated. Next up, doctors with such high volume, it needs to be, the feedback needs to be given to them. And I would argue there even needs to be more investigation into the clinical appropriateness of what they're doing. Is every time every patient goes to see that vascular surgeon, is every single one of them getting stenting? I don't know.

No. All I know is that something that is such an outlier needs to be investigated. Okay. And then, once you identify these folks, a lot of times you cannot ask the insurance carrier to take them out of the network. They'll come back to you and they'll just say, no, we will not do that. So you as an employer, you can use things like steerage and plan design in terms of saying, hey, look, these particular providers, they're going to have excessively high co-pays or co-insurance. And again, you don't have to apply it to like 95 or 98 or even 99% of the physicians in the network.

You only need to apply this to like the top 1, 2, or 3% of the highest billers for your particular employee group. And this is how you can apply the stratification for volume that is found in Medicare data to your employees and your plan. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

