Title: Medical Coding Overview_fqNBNE_YSro
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YSro
Language: en
Duration: 2:50
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and this is A Healthcare Z. Today we are going to be talking about medical coding. And so in dealing with claims costs, what literally drives the cost on the claim are the codes. And so it's very important that we understand what those codes are. As you can see there's a variety of them. So the first code here is the ICD-10 code. So ICD-10 stands for the International Classification of Disease is the 10th revision. We used the 9th revision literally since the 1970s until 2015. So the ICD-10 is relatively new.

And that's the diagnosis code. And that diagnosis can be either an actual disease like diabetes or it can be a symptom like headache or back pain. And all claims, the reason I have an asterisk there is because all claims require some type of diagnosis. Next up we have the CPT code, which stands for Current Procedural Terminology. And so the CPT code is, okay, well, what's done about that diagnosis? And that CPT code could be for an x-ray, it could be for a surgery, it could even be for an office visit. Because an office visit is not really a quote unquote procedure, but it's given a CPT code.

Okay. Next up is a DRG code and a DRG stands for a diagnosis related group. Now DRG codes are typically used for inpatient services. So for your typical employer, the vast majority of their services are not inpatient services. In fact, many of the very expensive services, like even a lot of outpatient surgeries, do not have a DRG code. And those outpatient surgeries could cost like $75,000 or $100,000. So not all codes have DRG codes. But some inpatient codes, inpatient states do have DRG codes. Okay. Last up is an HCPCS code.

It's never called a H, it's never called a, it's called a HCPCS code. And it stands for Healthcare Common Procedural Coding System. And it's actually, it's created by Medicare, but commercial insurance, insurance companies use it as well. And what it is, is it's for procedure codes that are not included in the CPT codes. So believe it or not, the full class of CPT codes doesn't have every procedure. And so they'll have to use a HCPCS code to make up for that. So certain examples of that would be like infusion specialty medications.

So like Remicade for Crohn's disease will actually have the infusion, will actually have its own HCPCS code. And then even things like mammograms actually don't have CPT codes. They actually use HCPCS codes. And so it has a very brief summary of coding, but it's very important for everyone in employee benefits to understand the basics of what these codes are. Thank you so much for watching..

