Title: Medicare Provider Payment Changes for 2021__k4kux7Pe3Q
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k4kux7Pe3Q
Language: en
Duration: 4:20
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching a Healthcare Z. I am back to making videos, so do not worry. We are still going to do this. So today's topic is Medicare provider pay changes. So it was just recently announced on December 1st by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, CMS, that there will be changes in physician reimbursement for 2021. I won't get into the details of the formula in terms of how they calculate this, but I will leave a link in the show notes so that you can read it for yourself.

But I'm going to get to the punchline in terms of how physician and other healthcare provider reimbursement from Medicare is going to change. Now, first up, there will be a decrease of 10% in reimbursement per, we'll just call it service. So remember, this is fee for service. This is fee for service Medicare. This is not Medicare Advantage. This is traditional Medicare. So this is on a per unit basis. So there's going to be a 10% decrease in the per unit reimbursement for radiologists, chiropractors, and nurse anesthetists.

There's going to be a 9% decrease in per service reimbursement for pathologists, physical therapists, and occupational therapists. There's going to be an 8% decrease in per service reimbursement for anesthesiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, interventional radiologists, and nuclear medicine physicians who do a lot of things like stress tests. Well, sometimes those are cardiologists that do that. Nuclear medicines who do bone scans and tagged white blood cell scans. Okay, next up, a 6% decrease in per service reimbursement for emergency room doctors, which of course, during the coronavirus, the pandemic, the emergency room doctor's like, hey, what are you doing here? Okay, now, there is going to be an associated increase in reimbursement for other types of doctors.

So it's not across the board. Other doctors are going to get a per service fee increase. Those are endocrinologists are going to receive a 16% increase. Rheumatologists, 15% increase. Hematologist-oncologist, 14% increase. Family practice physicians, 13% increase. And internal medicine physicians, 4% increase, right? So these provide, obviously, family practice, internal medicine provide the majority of primary care for seniors that are on Medicare. And endocrinologists provide a ton of diabetes and thyroid disease management for seniors.

Rheumatologists, believe it or not, so a ton of rheumatologist patient load is actually for fibromyalgia and actually they do a ton of osteoarthritis as well. So it's not just, you know, rheumatologist diseases like lupus and rheumato arthritis and psoriatic arthritis. They do a lot because osteoarthritis, which is just a degenerative joint disease, it's just the wear and tear of old age on the joints, which most seniors have. Rheumatologists see a ton of that. Okay, now, what does this mean? Does this mean that de facto payment to these specialties is going to go down? Not necessarily.

And let me tell you why, right? Because everyone knows the healthcare cost equation. It's the cost per unit of service times the number of units. And so if they're going to decrease the reimbursement per visit, well, then all those doctors need to do is increase the number of visits. So I saw this firsthand with a cardiology practice that I used to work with back in 2010 where they were doing some decreased reimbursement for cardiologist services. So maybe, listen, humans, including medical providers, are excellent at thwarting or skirting around the rules or gaming the system.

So they can just gain the system by increasing the number of services that they're doing or maybe increasing the coding. It's not upcoding, maybe they were just undercoding before. So they might maintain their reimbursement just by increasing the number of visits. Number two, look at the political timing of this. Arguably, the Trump administration is going to be gone. And so they're choosing now at a time where re-election is not possible for them to do a potentially very politically unpopular thing by changing, by decreasing these medical providers' reimbursement.

So the timing is super interesting. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

