Title: Medicare Cost Report Explained_Y1btqnW34qY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y1btqnW34qY
Language: en
Duration: 6:14
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the Medicare Cost Report. Now, this is an incredibly dry subject so hang in there. Please stick with me because it's very important. If we work in healthcare then we need to understand the Medicare Cost Report. Even if you work in commercial insurance and employers, you still need to understand the Medicare Cost Report. So, hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, other healthcare facilities are required to file a Medicare Cost Report annually with CMS.

Now, interestingly, doctors are not required to file a Medicare Cost Report. So, it's just on the facility side. It's not for the professional fee side. Now, there's a number of reasons why the Medicare Cost Report is filed. One of which is to determine if Medicare over or underpaid the hospital. And it's also used in broader policy decisions as well. Now, it's complicated as one could imagine. It involves a number of different worksheets. They have letters. The first one is worksheet S. And then there's A, B, C, D, and it keeps going on.

And this is where the costs for a hospital are enumerated at the cost center level. That's incredibly important. The most important thing in this entire video is that the Medicare Cost Report, the hospitals are required to report their costs to Medicare at the cost center level. What does that mean? It breaks them down into specific categories, such as in the general category, the hospital has to log their costs for laundry, for the cafeteria. Okay. Those are really clinically related, but they got to log them anyway.

Also, for the pharmacy, in total. Okay. Next up, for inpatient services, they have to break out the ICU from the general adult patients, also from the pediatric patients. Note, pediatrics, entire pharmacy, cafeteria. This doesn't just apply to Medicare patients. This is the cost for the entire hospital. Now, keep going on. Ancillary services, like operating room costs, are specifically broken out. Now, interestingly, if you go into the detail, I'll leave a link in the show notes to it, actual Medicare cost reports.

You can actually see it. It has a labor component, and then it has other components as well. So, for like the OR, it would be like the staff within the OR and the surgical supplies, etc. Likewise, in the ICU, it would be the staff for the ICU, supplies in the ICU, etc. The recovery room, labor and delivery. Again, look at this. Pediatrics, labor and delivery, those are like not Medicare, mostly Medicare areas of concern, right? Because Medicare is for people over the age of 65. So, the vast majority of babies in America are not, Medicare doesn't pay for labor and delivery.

Medicare doesn't pay for kids. So, this is the cost for the entire hospital, not just for their Medicare patients. Radiology is in there, and it keeps going on. Again, it is not. Point number four, it is not at the diagnosis level, it is not at the procedure level, and it is not at the doctor level. In other words, the hospital does not report, okay, what does it cost us to take care of a person with pneumonia? Nope, not anywhere on Medicare cost report. Okay, what does it cost for a laparoscopic cholecystectomy, which is a gallbladder surgery? Not anywhere on Medicare cost report.

They don't break it down by initial surgical procedure or by diagnosis in the case of pneumonia. They also don't break it down by, okay, well, what does it cost Dr. Jones, the surgeon, when he does his gallbladder surgeries versus Dr. Smith when she does her gallbladder surgeries? So, I have had the CEOs of major hospitals in America write me somewhat angry notes saying, of course we do cost accounting. Yes, they do cost accounting at the cost center level, but they do not do cost accounting at the individual diagnosis level, at the individual procedure level.

They don't do it at the individual doctor level. And so, I literally had the CFO of also one of the major hospital systems in America sort of come to my rescue. And in other words, he's like, no, you're not doing real cost accounting. Like, when you say you're doing cost accounting, you're doing it at the cost center level. You're doing it at the cafeteria and the laundry level. You're not doing true cost accounting, which is to say, how much does it cost for a knee replacement? How much does it cost for a knee replacement for Dr.

Jones? How much does it cost for a knee replacement for Dr. Smith? How much does it cost for a knee replacement for a commercially insured patient? How much does it cost for a knee replacement for a Medicare patient for Dr. Smith and for Dr. Jones? And it's that, it's that cost information that you could then use to say, okay, well, if Medicare pays $3,500, is that enough to cover the cost for a gallbladder surgery for Dr. Smith or a gallbladder surgery for Dr. Jones? And it's important at the individual procedure and diagnosis level to record it, to truly know if you're being paid enough at the individual diagnosis and procedure level.

It's also super important because, as the CFO pointed out, it allows you to find the tremendous variation in how much it costs one particular doctor to do a gallbladder surgery versus another doctor to do a gallbladder surgery. So when you see the bell-shaped distribution of physician costs by particular procedure, it allows you to then work with that to physician to find out for your very high-cost physicians, what are you doing? Why is it costing so much? Are your patients truly sicker? Are you doing something? Or is there some way that you're treating the patient that happens to use much more resources than another physician? Likewise, at the other end of the spectrum, you have physicians that are using very few resources.

Are they cutting corners? Do they have much less ill patients? Are they doing things in a much more efficient fashion? And the vast majority of the hospitals in America don't do that. Only a handful of hospitals in America actually do that. And it's that degree of cost accounting that allows you to truly measure and then truly manage your costs. That's what Vivian Lee talks about. That's what Pearl from Kaiser talks about. That's what Atul Gawande talks about. So when we talk about cost accounting, we're not talking about Medicare cost report accounting.

That's totally different. So I wanted to explain the Medicare cost report today. Thank you for watching..

