Title: Medicare_ Medicare Advantage_ Part D_ Medicare Supplement_ Medicaid_ Affordable Care Act Explained_gyTf-yzavvY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gyTf-yzavvY
Language: en
Duration: 25:57
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello everyone, welcome back. This is Dr. Eric Bricker and today we're going to start going over government programs in healthcare. The government is a huge payer of healthcare in America so we have to understand government programs. And the first government program we're going to go over is the largest of them all, Medicare. And believe it or not, Medicare actually has a ton of different parts. It has traditional Medicare, it has Medicare Advantage, it has Medicare Part D, and there are these things called Medicare Supplement Plans as well.

So we're going to start going over Medicare by starting out specifically with traditional Medicare and Medicare Advantage. I've got somewhat of a chart up here that we're going to go through. So, Medicare is health insurance for people once they turn 65. Now once you turn 65, you as a person kind of have a choice. You can either enroll in traditional Medicare and about 60% of seniors are on a traditional Medicare, or you can enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan. About 40% of seniors are on a Medicare Advantage plan.

Now Medicare Advantage plans have been growing super fast. So only a few years ago it was 30%. And only a few years before that it was 20%. So it's growing fast. So who knows, maybe we'll even overtake traditional Medicare in the near future. But traditional Medicare is set up in terms of, and we're going to break it down by parts, the money, and how the doctors and the hospitals are covered. So believe it or not, traditional Medicare itself even has subparts. It has Part A and it has Part B. Part A is health insurance coverage for our hospitalization, hospital services.

And Part B is coverage for doctor services and then for outpatient services, whether it be like imaging or lab or outpatient testing. Now, the advantages of Medicare for Part A is that it has very low premium and out-of-pocket costs. Now there is a deductible if you go into the hospital that you do have to pay, but it's not very high. Likewise, for Part B, believe it or not, Medicare Part B is actually optional. You don't have to enroll in Medicare Part B. But of course, Medicare Part A you automatically are a part of once you turn 65.

But Medicare Part B you actually have to enroll in. And then you actually have to pay out a premium to be in Medicare Part B. And then Medicare Part B also has co-insurance of 20%. So it does not pay for all of your doctor visit costs. It doesn't pay for all of your outpatient lab and all of your outpatient testing costs. And because more and more healthcare is done on an outpatient basis, when you have to pay that 20% co-insurance as part of Medicare Part B, it starts becoming a fairly significant out-of-pocket cost.

And there's no out-of-pocket max for Medicare Part B. So you're just going to keep paying 20% of all your outpatient services no matter what. Now, as far as the way that doctors and hospitals are paid by Medicare Part A, is Part A, and oh by the way, this is all run. The part of the government that runs Medicare is called CMS, which stands for the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. So it should be CMMS, but they just call it CMS. And CMS is a division within the Department of Health and Human Services.

So, CMS runs Medicare. Now, the prices that are paid to doctors and hospitals by traditional Medicare, they're set by the government. The government has a fixed fee schedule, and the doctors and hospitals have to say, okay, we'll take it. Now, it's strict fee for service. All the doctors and the hospitals have to do is they just have to bill the government, and the government will pay them back. There are no prior authorizations required. If you want to have a surgery done, you can have a surgery done. If you want to have an MRI done, you can have an MRI done.

As long as the physician orders it, you can have it. Next up, there's no referrals required. You can go to any doctor you want that takes Medicare. If you want to see a specialist like a dermatologist or an ear, nose, and throat doctor, you can do that. You want to see a primary care physician? You can do that. It is not an HMO. There's no gatekeeper. You're free to choose whoever you want to choose. So, there's greater freedom with traditional Medicare. Now, let's contrast that with Medicare Advantage. Now, Medicare Advantage covers hospital services, but it also covers the doctor services, the outpatient services.

You can almost think of like combined A and B. Now, it offers additional services as well. It offers dental insurance. That's included. It offers vision insurance. That's included. It offers hearing aid insurance, which is included. And that's important because a lot of seniors are hard of hearing. And these hearing aids can be upwards of $2,000 or $4,000. So, Medicare Advantage plans pay for some or all of hearing aids as well. It also includes prescription coverage as well. Now, traditional Medicare includes no prescription coverage.

We'll talk about Medicare Part D, which is the prescription coverage later on. But if you sign up for a Medicare Advantage plan, it just covers your prescriptions as well. Now, it is not run directly by the government. It's run by private commercial insurance companies. So, the two commercial insurance companies that are like the 800-pound gorilla when it comes to Medicare Advantage plans are UnitedHealthcare and Humana. Now, the other major health insurance companies like Aetna and Cigna and Anthem also have their own Medicare Advantage plans.

There are even some Medicare Advantage plans that are run by hospitals themselves. And there's a lot of these sort of smaller or regional Medicare Advantage plans as well. So, there's a ton of Medicare Advantage plans. But by far, the largest ones are UnitedHealthcare and Humana. Now, believe it or not, the premium for Medicare Advantage plans is low. Sometimes it's even zero. You can sign up for a Medicare Advantage plan for like zero dollars in additional premium. No. So, where in the world does the insurance company get the money from? The government pays the insurance companies for each Medicare beneficiary that they enroll.

And the government ends up paying them about one thousand dollars per beneficiary per month. They're about twelve thousand dollars per beneficiary per year. So, the government is writing checks to UHC and Humana and all the other Medicare Advantage companies. And then, those health insurance companies are then paying out to the doctors in the hospitals. So, the Medicare Advantage health insurance companies like the middleman. And they make about one thousand six hundred dollars per beneficiary in profit for each person that they have on a Medicare Advantage plan.

And that's important because it's actually twice as much as what they make for employer-sponsored health insurance. So, believe it or not, Medicare Advantage for private insurance companies is actually much more profitable than taking care of or providing insurance for people with employer-sponsored health insurance. And it's growing. So, it's more profitable and it's growing. So, like all health insurance companies want to get into this Medicare Advantage business because it's huge for them. Okay. Now, the prices that are then paid to the doctors in the hospitals, imaging centers, etc.

Those are actually negotiated by the commercial insurance companies with the doctors in the hospitals. And it's pretty close to the Medicare amount. It's about 95 to 105 percent of the Medicare amount. Now, the big difference with these plans is they are always or almost always either an HMO plan, which has a primary care gatekeeper. So, you have to go to the primary care physician first. And then they have to give a referral in order for you to see a specialist, like a dermatologist. And then they're going to tell you specifically which dermatologist you see.

So, there's no freedom in terms of being able to go see a dermatologist. And there's also no freedom of choice in terms of which dermatologist you see. So, in exchange for like zero premium and getting all this dental vision and hearing coverage, you're exchanging freedom. So, you have much less freedom in a Medicare Advantage plan, whereas in a traditional Medicare plan, you have much more freedom, but it costs you more. Now, some of these plans are not HMOs, but they're narrow network PPO plans, which means that you don't need a referral, but you don't have a lot of choices.

You have very few choices of hospitals or doctors that you go see. Now, and again, if you have the HMO, you have to get prior authorization and you need to get a referral to see that specialist. So, that's a little bit about traditional Medicare and Medicare Advantage. In the next segment, we'll then go on to talk about Part D and Medicare Supplements. Thank you so much. Hello and welcome back. We're going to continue our discussion of Medicare with Medicare Part D and Medicare Supplement Plans. So, Medicare Part D is the prescription drug coverage for people that have traditional Medicare.

And it's relatively new. It was passed in the early 2000s. Before the early 2000s, there was no prescription drug insurance, no prescription drug coverage as part of Medicare. And so, seniors had to pay out of pocket for all their prescriptions and it was costing them a lot of money. So, actually, George W. Bush and the Democratic Congress actually together sort of cooperated and they passed Medicare Part D as part of the Medicare Modernization Act. So, it's prescription drug coverage for people that are on traditional Medicare.

Now, believe it or not, it's actually done through the PBMs of health insurance companies. So, when you get your Medicare Part D coverage, you get it through Humana or United or Anthem. So, you get it through a private company. Now, it has either a low or a $0 premium. So, depending upon how it's set up, then people will just have to sign up for it. It doesn't cost them anything or they might have to pay a small premium every month to the health insurance company slash PBM to do it. Now, just like the pharmaceutical benefit structure for privately insured people, it's sort of similar for Medicare Part D.

So, you have a formula and you have these tiers, right? Tier 1 are your generics, Tier 2 preferred brand, Tier 3 non-preferred brand, Tier 4 specialty. You'll have co-pay amounts that you have to pay for each of those tiers. So, it would be like $5 for Tier 1, $20 for Tier 2, $40 for Tier 3, maybe 20% coinsurance for specialty pharmacy. Now, they also, for funding purposes, because they're like, oh, if we pay for all these prescriptions, it's going to be too expensive. So, what they did is they created this donut hole where what happened was is that once you had a certain amount of benefits from the government, and the government basically pays the Humana or the private insurance company, and then Humana then covers your prescription drugs, they said, okay, we'll cover you up to a certain amount and then we're going to stop covering.

And then once you reach out-of-pocket costs of a certain amount, then we're going to start covering you again. And that gap in coverage is referred to as the donut hole, right? Because it's like, okay, you've got coverage, and then you don't have coverage, then you have coverage again, as you spend more on medications throughout the year. But some of these private Part D plans basically structured it such that they would eliminate the donut hole. So, depending upon what kind of plan you get, some of them will have a donut hole and some of them won't.

And it was only done for funding purposes because they didn't want to spend too much money on this as a government program. Now, for the medications themselves, if the doctor prescribes you the medication, some medications require prior authorization. And again, there's a formula, so not all prescription drugs are covered, and not all of them are going to be covered unless you actually get permission from the insurance company to say, yes, it's okay for you to take this particular medication. Now, a Medicare supplement is totally different.

It, again, is provided by a private insurance company. And United and Aetna, they provide Medicare supplement plans, but believe it or not, there's actually these other health insurance, or these other insurance companies that don't provide health insurance, but they provide Medicare supplement plans. One of the big ones is Mutual of Omaha that does it. And then when United sells their Medicare supplement plans, they actually sell it through AARP. So that's why Medicare UHC is one of the largest providers of Medicare supplement coverage, because everybody just gets it through AARP, because a whole bunch of seniors are signed up for it.

Now, Medicare supplement, you do have to pay a low premium every month, and what you're paying a premium for is it's basically insurance to cover what traditional Medicare doesn't cover. So what does traditional Medicare not cover? Traditional Medicare has got that deductible for Part A hospitalization. So if you get hospitalized a lot, you've got all these deductibles that you're responsible for. And then remember, Part B has got that 20% coinsurance for all your outpatient services. So that could add up to a lot of money.

So a lot of seniors are like, well, I don't want to have to pay the deductible, and I don't want to have to pay all that coinsurance, so I'll actually buy extra insurance to cover those out-of-pocket expenses. And that's what a Medicare supplement is. It supplements your Medicare. But like I said, you've got to pay for it. Now, it doesn't change the way that your traditional Medicare is set up at all. All it is is insurance to cover the out-of-pocket costs associated with traditional Medicare Parts A and B.

So that is what I wanted to tell you about Medicare. Next up, we'll talk about Medicaid. Thank you for watching. Hello, and welcome back. Wardrobe change. Now we're going to talk about Medicaid. So Medicaid is the health insurance plan for low-income people. And by low-income, it typically is less than 100% of the federal poverty level. But it varies by state because, as you can see, point number one here is that Medicaid is actually administered at the state level. So there is no national Medicaid program. There's a Medicaid program for New York and for Illinois and for Georgia and for Nevada.

You get it. So each state sets a different rule about what they consider low-income. So for some states, it's as low as like you've got to be less than 40% of the federal poverty level in order to qualify for Medicaid. And for other states, they have other levels. But in general, it's for people with very low or no income. Okay. Now, it's typically for adults and children, and it's for people that are under the age of 65, right? Because if you're over the age of 65, then you're on Medicare. Almost automatically.

Okay. So now, it's only 50% paid for by the federal government and 50% paid for by the state government through various tax revenues. So the federal government collects taxes and they give the states half the budget, but then the states have to come up with the other half of the budget. But the states can essentially come up with their own rules. Now, what the states have now done is they have contracted out to commercial insurance companies like Blue Cross and United, etc. For their administration of the HMO plans.

So the federal government gives money to the states and the states then give money to insurance companies that administrate. So almost by definition, if you're on a Medicaid plan, you're on an HMO plan. And by HMO plan, remember from previous videos, we're talking you've got a primary care physician gatekeeper. You can't just go see a specialist if you want to. You've got to go see that primary care physician first. And then you've got to get a referral if you want to see a specialist. And that primary care physician tells you specifically which specialist, Dr.

Jones, Dr. Smith, Dr. Green, for dermatology that you're going to see. And you have to get prior authorization. You've got to get approval from the HMO company in order to do that. So, some example, and they've got all sorts of names. So you can be on Medicaid and you don't even know that you're on Medicaid. You think that you just have insurance, right? So in Illinois, they have three Medicaid HMO health insurance companies that they have. One is called Meridian, which is actually based in Michigan. And it's even, it used to be its own company, but now it's owned by Centene.

So believe it or not, Centene is like number 23 on the Fortune 500. I mean, it's a huge company that has over $100 billion a year in revenue. And all Centene does is run these state Medicaid HMO plans. And it's like never called Centene in any of the states. It always has these different names, but Centene is the umbrella parent company of them all. So in this case, in Illinois, it's called Meridian, but Centene is really the parent company. Centene is based in St. Louis. Then they also have Family Health Network, and that's specifically for Cook County, which is Chicago.

And then they have another one called Harmony, right? So they have all these sort of non-government, non-Medicaid sounding names. It just sounds like regular old insurance. And then in New York, believe it or not, they have 16 different health insurance companies that people can choose from when they're on Medicaid. So Blue Cross Blue Shields got a Medicaid HMO plan. Molina, which is based out of Long Beach, California, but they're another, they're sort of a competitor of Centene, but they're much smaller than Centene.

I mean, they're a multi $100 million or billion dollar organization on their own. But Molina offers some plans in New York State as well, et cetera, et cetera, until you add up to a total of 16 options in New York. Now, it depends upon where you live in the state. So certain counties will have options to certain health insurance plans, and other counties will not. So for example, in Illinois, the only people who have access to the Family Health Network are people who live in Cook County, essentially Chicago.

So if you live down in Springfield, this won't even come up as an option for you. Like go to a website and enroll, and this won't even show up unless you're in Cook County. Likewise, in New York, it depends upon what your location is in terms of which of the 16 plans would be an option for you. So that is a very high level rundown of Medicaid and how it's administered. Thank you for watching. All right. Welcome back. And this is the final segment about government programs in health insurance. And we're going to talk about the Affordable Care Act, abbreviated the ACA.

Sometimes it's referred to as Obamacare because it was one of the major legislations that was passed during the Obama administration. So it was passed into law in 2010 and then it had a whole bunch of different changes and regulations that went into effect in different years. But essentially around 2012 is when expanded insurance was done. And one of the reasons why the Affordable Care Act was passed was because there were so many people that were uninsured in America. There were upwards of 20 to 23% of the U.S.

population did not have any health insurance. They didn't have Medicare. They didn't have Medicaid. They didn't have any insurance through their employer. They fell through the cracks. So they wanted to expand health insurance coverage. Now, and it did so for 11 million people. So 11 million people now have health insurance that had not qualified or had money for health insurance previously. And what the Affordable Care Act said was that, look, if you were, if you made more than what people on Medicaid made, in other words, you made too much money to qualify for Medicaid, but you made between 125% of the federal poverty level and 400% of the federal poverty level.

So this is where, you know, for an individual, you might be making like 20, 30,000 or even for a family of four, you could be making 40, 50, 60, 70, even $80,000 a year. But the problem was, is if you were going to go out and try to buy health insurance, like it was going to cost you like $28,000 a year. So if you're making like $50,000 a year, like, and you're like at 200% of the federal poverty level, it's like you're going to spend half your income on health insurance. I mean, that's crazy. It's completely unaffordable, which is why nobody then bought it.

So they said, okay, well, if you make between 125% and 400% of the federal poverty level, and you don't get insurance through your job, then you're eligible to get subsidized health insurance from the government. And so who would fall into those categories? There's a lot of people that have part-time jobs. And if you have a part-time job, typically your employer doesn't provide you with health insurance. Likewise, as part of the Affordable Care Act, if you have more than 50 employees, then as a company, you're required to provide health insurance to your full-time employees.

But if you have less than 50 employees, you don't. So there's a ton of companies that employ a ton of people out there that have less than 50 employees, and they don't provide health insurance to their employees. It could be a small retailer. It could be like a landscaping company. It could be a plumber. I mean, you name it. There's all sorts of small businesses that do that. Okay. Now, like I said, the premiums are subsidized by the federal government because, again, a person couldn't afford $28,000 in health insurance premiums for a family of four.

So it was heavily subsidized by the government. Now, it would still cost, you know, several hundred dollars a month for your insurance plan. So you still had to pay, but it wasn't nearly the full cost. And what you would do is you would go out onto a website that's referred to as the exchange. And that exchange could either be run by your state or there was a significant number of states. It was more than half. I think it was like 28, 29 states that decided to do it through healthcare.gov, through the federal government's website.

So big states like Texas and Florida, they don't have their own state ACA websites. They just do it through healthcare.gov. And other big states like California, you go through the California website to pick your, your Affordable Care Act insurance in California. Okay. And then it's run by, it's sort of similar to state Medicaid and that's run through a commercial insurance program. So then you would sign up for your subsidized insurance through Blue Cross. Believe it or not, United doesn't participate in it at all.

They didn't want to do it. And Aetna didn't want to do it. And they're just barely starting to now. And Cigna just does it in a handful of places. So believe it or not, actually Centene and Molina offer ACA plans. And then there's another company called Oscar that offers ACA plans. And there's a handful of other like smaller health insurance companies that offer these ACA plans. But historically, three out of the big four health insurance plans, they didn't offer ACA plans. They didn't want to participate because they didn't think they could make any money off of it.

Okay. Okay. So when you buy health insurance through the exchanges, it has to offer what we refer to as minimal essential coverage, which means it has to cover like what people would consider to be health insurance. In other words, it would cover hospitalizations. It would cover ER visits. It would cover doctor visits. It would cover emergency room visits. It would cover labor and delivery. It would cover your prescription medications. It would cover mental health services to a psychologist or a psychiatrist, etc. So it defined what it had to cover and it's called minimal essential coverage.

Now, but you still had a deductible and co-insurance and co-pays and all that stuff. And that's referred to as the actuarial value. And they said that the plans through the Affordable Care Act had to have at least a 60% actuarial value. Which, without getting into the details, essentially means that these plans on the Affordable Care Act exchange, they can have really high deductibles. So it's very common for these plans to have $2,000, $4,000, even $6,000 individual deductibles. Like a family deductible of $12,000.

So a lot of people that signed up for Affordable Care Act plans, like they have insurance, but to a certain extent they're kind of functionally uninsured because they have to reach like $6,000 worth of expenses before their health insurance kicks in. And if they don't make a lot of money, well shoot, they probably don't have the $6,000. So yes, they have insurance, but it hasn't necessarily totally solved the problem of coverage. Now, and again, these plans are, in terms of plan design, are typically either an HMO, and those HMO plans typically tend to have lower deductibles.

So they might only have like a $200 deductible, but then you've got to go to a PCP gatekeeper and you've got to get referrals, etc. Or it might be what's referred to as a narrow network PPO plan, where you're free to choose the hospital and the doctor that you go to, but you just don't have a lot of choices. Like your in-network choices would only be like a handful of doctors or hospitals, as opposed to a huge, broad network like your typical PPO plan. Now, there's a couple of quirky things about the Affordable Care Act.

So, a person, let's say they got a job and they made $50,000 a year, they're the only breadwinner for their family of four, so they fall within the 125 and the 400% of the public. But they cannot get a subsidy on the exchange if they are offered health insurance through their employer. And here's the problem, because most employers will pay for most or all of the premium for the employees themselves, so that person as an individual might not have to pay any premium for their own health insurance. But, the ACA doesn't require the employer to pay the premium coverage for the family members.

So, if the person wants to add their spouse and their kids, they have to pay for it themselves. And if you want family coverage, it might cost upwards of $20,000 a year in premium that you would have to pay. And you're like, well, shoot, I don't want to pay $20,000, I don't make a lot of money, so I'm just going to go out onto the exchange and get my health insurance on the exchange. Aha! You can't do that, because the ACA said that if you have health insurance offered through a job, even if they don't pay for the premium, just if they offer it, then you do not qualify for a subsidy through the exchange.

So, this person who works and gets their own health insurance paid for, but they don't get their spouse and their kids' health insurance paid for, they cannot go onto the exchange and get subsidized health insurance. And that's referred to as the family glitch. So, there's a significant number of people in America who still don't have health insurance because they fall into that family glitch. And everyone's like, look, there's no way we're paying $20,000. We can't get a subsidy through the exchange, so the rest of our family is just going to go without health insurance.

So, that ACA is complicated, certainly expanded coverage to a lot of folks, over 11 million people, but I wanted to walk you through the details of the Affordable Care Act coverage. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching..

