Title: Mental Health Treatment Lowers Healthcare Costs_M8J2xiDWKD4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M8J2xiDWKD4
Language: en
Duration: 5:11
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing mental health. And mental health is somewhat of the elephant in the room because not a lot of people like to talk about it and there is quite a bit of stigma associated with it, but I think that's why it's particularly important for us to address it today. And we're going to talk about two of the most frequent mental health diagnoses and those are depression and anxiety. Okay, so depression is found about 7% of the adult US population and it's actually even more prevalent in 18 to 25 year olds.

So about 11% of 18 to 25 year olds have depression. So for employers that have like a large millennial workforce, just know that you actually probably will have a higher rate of depression in your employee population, vis-a-vis an employer that has older employees. Okay, as far as anxiety goes, it's even more common, 19%, so about one in five US adults. And as you can imagine there are varying degrees of severity of anxiety, but a full 56% of that 19%, in other words about 10% have either moderate or severe anxiety that actually causes them a fair amount of impairment in their lives, in their home lives and in their work lives.

Okay, and so that impairment is really one of the reasons I wanted to bring that up today. I would see this in my patients where it wasn't just a mood disorder, it wasn't just about their emotions, these people just had a hard time thinking. They had a hard time remembering things. They had a hard time articulating themselves and talking. And, you know, through a combination of antidepressant medication and cognitive behavioral therapy and a variety of things, you know, certainly these are tough diseases to treat, but I certainly would see people to get better, get better.

And it was amazing. As they got better, like they became more articulate. They were able to use logic and reasoning a lot better because their mental health disease was actually impairing their ability to think. And the prototypical example of this is in diabetes, right, where diabetes, actually 12% of people with diabetes have depression. So it's even more common in people with diabetes. And they've done research to find that people with diabetes who were depressed, they didn't make their appointments as often.

They missed a lot of them. They weren't able to adhere to their dietary recommendations, and they weren't able to adhere to their medication regimen, whether with pills and or insulin as well as those people with diabetes who did not have a mental health problem, right? And as a result of all of this, it caused increased complications. So worsening retinopathy, which is damage to the eye, worsening neuropathy, which is damage to the nerves, worsening nephropathy, which is damage to the kidneys. So, and I would see this in my patients where I just saw that there was no way that I could really effectively help them with their diabetes unless we also helped them with their depression and their anxiety, okay? Well, this video is not meant to be doom and gloom.

There is hope. So the Intermountain Healthcare System out in Utah actually did something incredibly innovative where they actually incorporated a mental health professional, whether it be a nurse or a counselor or a psychologist, actually in their primary care clinics. And they would work as a team collaboratively with the primary care physician. And what they found, this is a very long study, it's like 10 years, it was published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. It literally had over 100,000 participants.

And they found that compliance with best practices in diabetes care went up in the clinics that had the mental health professionals. And they also found that hospitalization for patients that saw the PCPs that had the mental health professionals went down and ER visits went down as well. So it really had a positive outcome in terms of their diabetes care and also their overall utilization of healthcare services. Now, in terms of the bottom line, it actually saved money. It saved about $260 per member per year.

And so if you take your typical plan, that's like, let's say $10,000 per employee per year, where there's typically a ratio of two members for every employee. So that's about $5,000 per member per year. And so the $260, that's about 5%. Okay, so your trend is not going to be like totally reversed because of addressing mental health, but you know, it's a start. And then specifically for people with diabetes, their costs decreased $340 per member per year. And for people with depression, it decreased $285 per member per year.

And what did it cost Intermountain Healthcare? Interestingly, they reported that as well, it cost them $22 per member per year. Now that's just for the mental health component. It's not for the entire PCP office. However, look at that. That's an over 10 to 1 ROI by addressing mental health. So there are numerous ways that employers can implement mental health as it relates to the overall medical care. But I want to just begin to address the elephant in the room. And I hope that you all learned something from this today.

And thank you for watching A Health Care Z..

