Title: Multiple Sclerosis for the Employee Benefits Professional_ybB-cEzFFRo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ybB-cEzFFRo
Language: en
Duration: 13:17
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is multiple sclerosis for the employee benefits professional. Now, this video is the result of a request by a viewer. So, this video is for you. And just know that if you have requests for videos that you'd like to make, then please message me. Best way is probably through LinkedIn and I'd be happy to consider it. So, thank you so much for requesting a video about multiple sclerosis. So, it's important for employee benefits professionals to understand what multiple sclerosis is and how it impacts individuals and the plant.

Now, multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease of the brain and spinal cord. By autoimmune, I mean the body's own immune system is attacking itself. Now, in this case, it's attacking cells in the brain and the spinal cord and specifically your body is creating antibodies that are essentially attacking the, what's referred to as the myelin sheath. In other words, the insulation that's around the axon that sends the electrical impulse through the neuron and it damages that insulation or that sheath that's around the neuron.

And not only that, but it can also damage the neuron itself. And it can then manifest itself in various ways. And sometimes it even initially presents, it almost seems like a stroke because a person will have weakness or numbness, like specifically in a hand or in an arm or in a leg, or sometimes I might even go partially and temporarily blind as well. So, it can affect the nerves of the eyes as well. Now, it oftentimes will manifest itself in sort of what's referred to as a relapsing and remitting manner.

So, people will have sort of this flare where they'll have these symptoms and then it'll have to be treated and it'll quiet down and then they'll flare again and then it'll quiet back down. And the time between those flares could be weeks or months or years. It's highly variable. So, like I said, it can manifest itself as weakness. People are unable to walk unassisted or unable to use one of their arms. It results in muscle spasticity. If you don't have the right neurological connection to your muscles, your muscles tend to spasm, which is fairly common for people with MS when they're having a flare.

It can, obviously, your nerves go into your bladder to help you urinate. So, people have problems with urinary retention and incontinence as well. And then again, the visual problems too. Now, there are about 914,000 people in America living with multiple sclerosis today. Now, it typically manifests itself, it first appears, when people are between the ages of 20 and 40. Now, it can be earlier and it can be later, but in general, the most common flare or initial presentation of multiple sclerosis is when a person is in their 20s and 40s.

And I actually did quite a few neurology rotations when I was at Hopkins in my residency, and I would see quite a few inpatients for multiple sclerosis. And then when I was practicing in a community hospital, I actually had a handful of people that came in with their initial diagnosis or with a flare of multiple sclerosis as well. I remember one particular gentleman, he was like 19, and he was sort of, you know, sort of your classic presentation where he had a weakness in one of his hands, just out of nowhere, perfectly healthy 19 year old young man.

And then out of nowhere, he could like barely use one of his hands and one of his arms. Now, that means that it's so to run the numbers on this, there are 258 million adults in the United States, which if you divide the 914,000 people with living MS by the 258 million adults in the United States, that means that there are 0.3 35% of the US population living with MS. And then if you want to do that in terms of a ratio, that's one in every 286 adults. So then if you apply that to like a plan with a thousand members, let's say it's 500 employees and a thousand lives on it, then that means that you're going to have about three plan members.

Now, of course it varies. You could easily have a plan with a thousand people with zero people with MS or one or five, like it's going to vary. However, it's one in every 286, which for a thousand people would mean about three people in that population of a thousand are going to have MS. Now, the initial presentation or the flare when you're hospitalized, oftentimes it's treated with IV steroids because when I'm not, not like steroids, like weightlifters, right? But these are corticosteroids that decrease inflammation because what you're essentially doing is you're trying to turn down or shut down the immune system, which is kind of ramped up and attacking your own nerve cells or something that's more sophisticated that's referred to as plasmapheresis, where literally it almost looks like dialysis, where they hook up to a big IV and they take your blood out of you and it goes into a big machine and it literally removes the person's own plasma and it replaces it with albumin, which is essentially very similar to plasma.

And then it goes back into your body. So it's like this big loop through a machine and that's done because it's the plasma that actually contains the antibodies. So when you do the plasmapheresis, you're essentially exchanging the plasma that has the antibodies that are attacking your nervous system with the albumin, which does not have the antibodies that, you know, therefore the idea is that it would attack your immune system less. Okay. Now, if you're, these are inpatient hospital stays. I've seen in the inpatient hospital stays where they're getting IV steroids, it's very high concentrations of steroids.

And it might be a handful of days and the person starts to get better and then they're discharged. So that might be, and is the in-network allowed amount for commercial insurance? That might be as little as maybe like $10,000. Whereas for people, they'll, believe me, I have seen people in the hospital for weeks, even more than a month or months with a flare of their MS. Plasmapheresis is just really resistant to any sort of therapy. They continue to have, you know, bad symptoms or worsening symptoms. Plasmapheresis is very expensive.

So you can easily have hospital stays for greater than a hundred thousand dollars for somebody with a flare with MS as well. Now there's also medications. Fortunately, they've developed a lot more new medications to try to prevent these relapses from occurring that you take in the outpatient setting. Some are through an IV. So you have to get an outpatient IV infusion. Some are injections where you can inject yourself and then some are actually pills. And so some of the more common pills that I've seen that people with MS take are, one are Galenia and Tecfidera.

So Galenia, it's brand only. There is no generic Galenia. It is, according to a website, if you don't have insurance, I'll leave a link to it in the show notes. It's about $9,500 per month. Now that is not through a PBM rate. So I don't know through your particular PBM what that would be, but just know that the makers of Galenia also have a copay assistance program where if you read in the fine print of it, it says that it covers up to $18,000 of out-of-pocket costs for patients as part of their plan design, right? So typically, even though it's a pill, the Galenia would fall under the specialty pharmacy.

So let's kind of run through an example of that. So here, let's say that the contracted rate within the PBM would be like, instead of $9,500, let's just say it's $5,000 if you ran it through your PBM. That means that it is oftentimes the specialty coverage, specialty medication coverage in a plan design, oftentimes it's 20%, right? So it's like coinsurance, it's not like quote-unquote copay, right? So that would be $1,000 out of the $5,000. And that's just for a one-month supply. So you're going to pay $1,000 a month, like 12 months, so that would mean you'd be paying $12,000.

Now, with that assistance program, because it covers up to $18,000, then that $12,000 would be available for assistance from the copay assistance program. However, the plan itself was still paying for $4,000 out of the $5,000. So the plan itself is going to be paying $48,000 a year for the Galenia pills. Now, and then if you work that out off the $9,500, it's about $300 a pill. And then here, you're talking like $160, $170, $170 a pill. Next up is the TECFIDERA, which actually does have a generic equivalent now that has come out.

It's a dimethyl fumarate, and it's $640 a month. So that is one-eighth, about one-eighth the cost of the Galenia. So just know that, I mean, it's obviously still very expensive, but it's a lot less than what the Galenia would be for the TECFIDERA. So just know that the medication costs associated with MS, like they're high. Now, people with MS are, it's very common for them to be on a lot of medications and actually need a lot of services in addition to seeing a neurologist. And that would be like one, physical therapy.

Again, because it causes the weakness and the spasticity, it's very common for people with MS to actually need physical therapy as well. And it might be more than those sort of 16 visits that are typically covered to just know that if you've got a plan member with MS and your plan is like, hey, you only get 16 visits with a physical therapist, then just know that it's highly likely that you'll have plan members that will need more than 16 visits over the course of a 12-month period of time for physical therapy.

Likewise, they're oftentimes on medications for bladder incontinence and urinary retention problems. It's very common. I would say that almost, with the exception of that 19-year-old gentleman who had just been diagnosed with MS, like literally every other patient that I saw that had, MS also had concomitant depression. So it's very common for people to also require antidepressants as well, which is also super hard because then in terms of them being able to manage their medications and actually have their follow-up appointments and being able to function, if you're depressed, it's just hard to do all that stuff.

So just know that treating the underlying depression that's associated with MS is super important. It oftentimes is associated with pain. So a lot of these people were on pain medications as well. A lot of times these people had severe fatigue. Again, it would kind of come and go, but fatigue was always a major issue for one of the patients that I saw with MS. And then they're also on medications for the spasticity in their muscles as well, various muscle relaxants. Okay. Now it's important to note that all these medications that they're on, like the medications themselves tend to have side effects.

And so it's very important when you're treating somebody with MS, it's not only that you're treating their disease and trying to prevent those relapses from happening, but you're also managing a lot of the side effects from the medications as well. Now, what does all this mean for a person with MS is that that person has a very complicated medical condition. And remember the biopsychosocial model of disease that this just doesn't happen in, you know, biologically to a person, it affects their family. It affects their ability to work.

It affects their income. It affects their expenses in terms of their out-of-pocket expenses. In terms of the psychology, obviously we talked here about the depression as well, and it impacts the entire family unit. I mean, every time I saw a patient with MS, like their family was always in the hospital, like with them, of course. And that was super important because oftentimes when the person was so fatigued and depressed with MS, they had a hard time like following along with what the doctor had to say or what the nurse had to say.

And so to have the family member then advocate for the patient as well was super important because it was just hard for the person with MS to keep it straight. And one would not expect the person with MS to keep it straight. So the support and the expertise of whether it be case management nurses or the multidisciplinary team in the neurologist's office, super important. If you're a plan administrator and you know, one, you need to know if you have people on your plan with MS or not. So when you're doing analytics, you need to be like, look, we need to look for those ICD-10 codes for MS, and we need to figure out if we need any plan members with MS.

And if we do, then we better have some sort of case nurse manager, nurse support, advocacy, healthcare navigation, what have you, they better be in a good relationship with frequent interaction. Now, of course, you know, for privacy reasons or whatever, maybe you don't know the specific name of the individual. You don't know what the specific nature of the communications are between these people and the patient with MS and their family, but just know that they like, they should be talking like every week, every other week, like every month, like they shouldn't be support and expertise.

Like they need to be friends with this person. That is the type of, of intervention and support that you as an employee benefits professional can provide for these people because it affects so much of the body and it affects the family unit. And it just, just affects so many things that you can't just say, oh, well, they've got a neurologist and they're on their meds. Then, you know, that's kind of the best we can do. No, there absolutely are things that you as an employee benefits professional can do as well.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

