Title: New York Times Article on Hospital Price Transparency - Learn WHY Hospital Prices Are Kept Secret_1Kh7EA_Lt-c
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lt-c
Language: en
Duration: 11:54
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the New York Times article on hospital and commercial insurance prices. So today is August 22nd, 2021 and this article just came out today in the New York Times. I had many people in the industry make me aware of this article. So thank you so much. This is a front page article on the New York Times. We don't really use pages anymore. It's on the internet. But you get the point. This is like front and center. It's by Sarah Cliff who's like one of like the preeminent health care reporters in America.

So you got one of the preeminent newspapers and one of the preeminent journalists writing about hospital prices and the new price transparency rule. So let's dive in. So the price transparency mandate was put in place by the Trump administration. And interestingly, it's actually been continued by the Biden administration. However, there have not been any fines levied. So the fines actually pretty puny. But if hospitals don't comply with posting their prices by specific commercial insurance payers, so Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna, they've got and self-pay, they've got to say specifically for MRI, surgery, having a baby, etc, etc.

They've got to say by Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna, what those prices are. And if they don't do that, oh, and what the self-pay price is, comparison to that, if they don't do that, they've got to pay a fine of about $109,000 a year. So they break it down by day for days of not compliance. But if you're not compliant for a year, you basically got to pay about $109,000, which in the grand scheme of things for a hospital, it's actually not that much money. So it's kind of a wimpy fine. But the Biden administration is not even levying fines.

They're just sending warning letters. And if you don't comply after a warning letter, they're going to send a second warning letter. So this is essentially not being enforced. But some hospitals have already started posting some of the prices. And so this article has been about, well, what have we learned by all this price posting information? Well, we've learned that there's huge variance. This is not necessarily a new story, right? I think the fact that hospital prices vary so significantly, people have known about that for years.

So the New York Times has reported on it before. But now it just gives us more fodder and more examples of this. And it shows how, look, at the same hospital, that different insurance carriers at the same hospital will have very different allowed amounts. And the allowed amount is the true price. And we're talking about prices. We're not talking about billed charges. We're just talking about the allowed amount after the discount's been applied. That's the true price. So, at the University of Mississippi, this article says as an example, look, a colonoscopy with Cigna, the allowed amount is $1,463.

And at the exact same hospital with a different insurance company, it's $2,144. Right? So you're talking like a 50% difference in price at the same hospital depending upon which insurance company you have. So the article goes on. It says, look, even if you're at the same hospital, and even if it's the same insurance carrier, it still varies. And it uses the example of St. Luke's in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, for an MRI of the knee, where the UnitedHealthcare PPO allowed amount is $4,029. And the UnitedHealthcare HMO allowed amount is $1,093.

So same hospital, same insurance company. But if you're on the PPO plan versus the HMO plan, totally different price, like four times different price. Now, there's even more permutations and combinations. So if you're with the same insurance company, but you're at a different hospital, the price also varies. So in the article, they use the example of a rabies treatment. Unfortunately, it got bit by an animal. Where at Intermountain in Utah, the allowed amount with an insurance company is about $5,000. Whereas with the insurance company at the University of Florida, it's about $10,000.

So same insurance company, different hospitals, totally different price. Okay. The article is very lengthy. However, nobody talks. They went to all of the major insurance carriers, Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna. They could not get anybody to talk. And in fact, they did get someone from the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association to talk, who used to work there, doesn't work there anymore. And he said, look, all these contracts between the hospitals and the commercial insurance carriers, they have gag clauses. Now, which means you can't talk about it.

So, now most contracts, anybody who knows anything about contracts knows there is also typically a clause in the contract that says, look, if any part of this contract is against the law, then that part of the contract is null and void. Okay. So when they pass this law requiring posting of it, well, then the part of the gag clause that would forbid the posting as required by law, it would be nullified, right? So because the law changed, then they essentially could say, okay, well, we can break the gag clause to comply with the law.

But the gag clause might say, look, you can't talk to any media sources about the pricing. Well, there's no law that says they have to talk to the media about this. So the insurance companies aren't talking about it. Okay. Now, what the article does not explain, which is of supreme importance, which we're going to go into now, is why does all this happen? Why all the variants? And that's a huge hole in this article. Like, narrowed this huge article, there's no explanation of why. We got to go through that. You need to understand that.

Okay. So you need to understand, if you don't learn anything else from this video, you need to understand that contracts between hospitals and commercial insurance companies are negotiated at a total contract value level. Total contract value. It's not, they don't, they don't be like, oh, well, we'll charge you $1,400 for this and $2,400 for that. Like, that's not what they're getting at. What they're getting at is, look, I'm hospital A. You're Blue Cross. Okay. I, me as hospital A, I'm concerned about how much you, Blue Cross, is going to pay me in total for the entire year.

Let me give you an example. So the article cites how New York University, NYU Langone Medical Center has revenue of about $5 billion a year. Now, we've talked about on A Healthcare Z previously that hospital revenue typically breaks down a 40% commercial insurance, 40% Medicare, 10% Medicaid, and 10% self-pay. Now, it varies a little bit, but that's generally what it is. Okay. So you apply those percentages to the $5 billion, and that means that commercial insurance makes up about $2 billion of NYU's total revenue.

Okay. So then you've got your major four players, Blue Cross, United, Cigna, Aetna. And then you've got like a whole bunch of other folks, right? Yeah. Humana, local folks, yada, yada, yada. Okay. But the big four, Blue Cross, United, Cigna, Aetna. So at the end of the day, Blue Cross and United are really much bigger than Cigna and Aetna. Aetna, CVS, blah, blah, blah. Okay. So anyway, so that means, you know, I'm estimating here that of that $2 billion of commercial insurance revenue, probably about $500 million is coming from Blue Cross, and about $500 million is coming from United.

They add up to a billion, and then everybody else adds up to the other billion, and that gets you to $2 billion. Okay. So when NYU is sitting down with Blue Cross, they're like, look, you need to pay us $500 million a year. And oh, by the way, that $500 million a year needs to go up by 8% per year. And we only negotiate this total contract value like every three to four years. Because it's like a 12 to 18 month process to negotiate these contracts, so they don't do it all the time. But what they do is they put in automatic inflators on the contract that says, look, the entire contract value is going to inflate by about 8% every year until we renegotiate it, you know, four or five years down the road.

So in other words, they're getting $500 million this year, and then they're getting $500 million plus 8% the next year, and then another 8% on top of that the following year. Okay. So what do they do? The hospitals themselves hire outside consultants to model their patient volume from each payer through each of the different services, maternity, ER, orthopedics, cardiology, cancer. They'll say, okay, look, for Blue Cross, United Signature, Aetna, how many patients are we getting into our different service lines? And then we're going to hire consulting firms like EY, Ernst & Young, or KPMG, and there are other companies that do this as well, to be like, okay, how should we model our contracts so that we're getting $500 million a year from Blue Cross or United? And then what they do is they go through an exercise of horse trading on specific services.

And I've got previous A Healthcare Z videos that go on this in much more detail, but that's where the horse trading takes the form of, okay, hey, I'll give you, I, you know, NYU, I'll give you, United, a much better rate on our MRIs, but I'm totally going to jack up your rate on your deliveries. And then for Blue Cross, they might offer the exact opposite deal where they say, hey, look, Blue Cross, we'll give you a great rate on our maternities, but we're going to totally jack up your rates on your MRIs.

And at the end of the day, the insurance carrier and the hospital, like, don't really care about the nitty gritty. All they care about is the total contract value. Aha! Until high deductible and consumer health plans came into effect. Because when everybody paid co-pays, they weren't exposed to all the machinations of these contract negotiations. And these contract negotiations became completely irrational through a process called strategic pricing, which, again, I've got another video that I will leave a link to in the show notes.

But because people were shielded from that by co-pays, nobody cared. But then the deductibles went up. And now about 35% of the U.S. population on an employer plan is on a high deductible plan. So now they're exposed to all these wacky prices. And they made noise, and they talked to their congressman, and they talked to the president, and they said, look, this has got to change. This is ridiculous. And so we have the price transparency law. We have a change in the law because consumers were, a pain point was created for them by their high deductible plans.

And it exposed all the lunacy that was going on in an effort to create a $500 million contract that went up by 8% per year. That's what's going on. Now, the final point I want to make is, the New York Times could have figured this out. This is not rocket science. Every single hospital CEO, CFO, and the head of billing is called patient financial services. So every single director of patient financial services, every single hospital CFO, every single hospital CEO in America knows this and understands this. Like, get on the phone and call these people.

I mean, you're not going to have NYU telling you, but I guarantee you, you can have a hospital and somewhere in America tell you exactly how this works. And they can be an anonymous source. I mean, the journalists in America love using anonymous sources. Like, come on. Call these people up. So I'm asking you, New York Times, every other newspaper in America, do a follow-on story to this story about why. Because you'll find the answer. It's there. You just got to look for it. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

