Title: Nurse Case Managers_ Secret Weapon in Primary Care_TZ1cSu2ODRo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TZ1cSu2ODRo
Language: en
Duration: 11:14
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A HealthcareZ. Today's topic is the secret weapon in primary care, managing hospitalization. That's right. Wait a minute. Primary care doctors, they don't manage hospitalizations. Aha, but they do. Now, let me let you in on a little secret to start. So the way to investigate companies or really to investigate their strategies or their best practices is to look at their job descriptions that they post online. This is a technique that private equity firms, venture capital firms use.

Wall Street analysts use this. They'll be like, I want to find out what Amazon's doing. I'm going to go look and see what the job postings for Amazon are. Well, what you can do is you can look at highly successful primary care groups who've done a great job at improving quality and lowering costs and look at their job descriptions. And so if you look at one such organization is ChenMed. I'll leave a link in the show notes about ChenMed. I've made many videos about them before. And they got about 100 clinics nationwide where they're risk bearing primary care groups.

And they have job descriptions for a position called an acute care nurse case manager. And what do they do? They manage the care of patients who are admitted to the hospital. Wait a minute. So in other words, the primary care physician practice is heavily involved in the hospital admission. That is unique. That is the exception, not the rule in America. Now, why is this so important? Well, a hospital admission costs at minimum about $20,000. And that's the allowed amount. That's not the bill charge. That's by the time everything's said and done.

Sure, you might have some that are 10. You might have others that are 50 or 60 or 100. But on average, it's about 20 grand per admission. And this is what is referred to as a transition of care. When you go from being at home or at your job or what have you. And then you get admitted to the hospital. And then you need to get discharged. And that is a transition of care. And that's a huge area in health care where patients fall through the cracks. And they end up getting readmitted. And if you're on a commercial health insurance plan, then guess what? It's another 20 grand every time you get readmitted.

So the employer or the primary care group that's taking risk, they're still on the hook for those readmissions. Okay, so the acute care nurse case manager works for the primary care physician's office. And they coordinate with the hospital case manager, the insurance case manager. Wait a minute. So you mean to tell me there's already two other case managers and that's still not enough? Yes. Those two, and I'm going to get to this in a minute. Those two case managers are actually insufficient for what is required to effectively manage the inpatient stay of a patient and their discharge.

Okay. They also have to coordinate with the social worker because it's actually the social worker that coordinates placement in terms of where they're going to be discharged to. And then with the various facilities. Okay, so where can a patient be discharged to after their hospitalization? Where in the universe can they go? They can go to a skilled nursing facility. Sometimes people just call that a nursing home, right? They can go to acute rehab. And typically for somebody to go to acute rehab, they have to be able to do like three hours of physical therapy a day.

If you can't do three hours of physical therapy a day, you go to a sniff and they'll still give you some physical therapy, but not three hours worth. So typically acute rehab might be after like a total knee replacement where you can't, you know, you can't do physical therapy at home, but you're functional enough to actually be able to do three hours of rehab a day. Okay. Or a long-term acute care hospital. So you might be discharged to an LTAC. And that's for people who have like really severe wounds or sometimes they're even discharged still on a ventilator.

So that's pretty rare. The more common one is sniff or acute rehab or home with home health. So they might send you home and you might need to have. So a common thing is that when a mother has a newborn and that newborn has jaundice, then they'll have to send the baby home with the UV lights to treat the bilirubin in their skin, to treat the jaundice in their skin. Okay. They're having a home health, which is a home health company that delivers that to the house. And guess what? If that home health delivery of the UV lights and that doesn't work out, guess what's happening to the baby? They get somnolent.

They don't drink. They get dehydrated and whoop, they're back into the hospital. So it's hugely important to be able to coordinate with the home health agency. And then finally, some people are just discharged home. And they're like, okay, you know, I'm fine. I don't need any help, you know. But listen, the vast majority of time, like of all these, like just being discharged home, like without home health or no acute rehab or no SNF, that's actually kind of rare. Okay. Now, what do these acute care nurse case managers, like what do they actually do? They have daily in-person contact with the patient and their family or caregiver.

What does that mean? They are in the hospital. Okay. Notice it is daily and it is in-person. Okay. That is hugely important. So ChenMed knows what they're doing and they know, and they've been doing this for a while. They know that if this does not occur daily and if it does not occur in-person, it does not work because things change in the hospital very rapidly. What's your condition? What's your discharge? Like you could just be like, all of a sudden, doctor walks into the room. You're going home today. Comes out of the blue.

You had no clue. Other times it's like, okay, we're going to discharge you. And then, oh no, some lab report comes back. I'm like, no, we got to keep you for another three or four days. So things change constantly. So it has to be daily and then it has to be in person. Okay. Okay. Now, that nurse case manager from the primary care physician practice is also communicating this back to the primary care physician's office. That does not typically happen today. Right now, hospitalization for a primary care physician is a huge black box where the vast majority of primary care physicians don't even know that their patients are hospitalized.

But if they are hospitalized, they have no clue what is going on with them while they're there. And Chenbet is like, aha, that's a problem. Which is why they have these acute care case managers communicating all that information to the primary care physician. Okay. Next up, hugely important. The acute care nurse case manager schedules a four-day appointment. In other words, an appointment four days after discharge prior to the discharge. So if you're getting discharged on a Monday and Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, you're going to see the doctor on Friday.

If you're getting discharged on Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, you're seeing the doctor on Tuesday and you have an appointment location and you have an appointment time. That is almost never done with normal patients. They're discharged. And on the discharge paperwork, it says, make an appointment with your primary care physician. So you call up the primary care physician's office. If you have one, you talk to the schedule. You don't talk to the doctor. You talk to the schedule. What do they say? Oh, we can see you in a month and a half.

We can see you in two weeks. No, four days. Again, transitions of care. I guarantee you they've changed your medications. They've gotten rid of medications. They've added new medications. This is a huge opportunity for error. And if those errors occur, guess where the patient's going? They're going back to the ER and they're going back into the hospital. So actually having an appointment scheduled prior to discharge is hugely important. And the acute care nurse case manager guarantees that that happened. Note, the hospital case manager, they don't do that.

The insurance company case manager, they don't do that. But this one, the acute care nurse case manager from the primary care physician's office, they make sure. Okay, next up, they ID patients that are going to be a good fit for community case management. In other words, there's a lot of times where there needs to be care, a lot of times for cancer patients, right? Because they're getting like outpatient radiation oncology. They're getting outpatient chemotherapy. They might be getting an outpatient PET scan.

And so the acute care nurse case managers, they don't do that because the patient's not hospitalized. But that's a lot of outpatient different doctors and facilities and services. So the community case managers are coordinating that. And then there's also disease management where the nurses are actually working with the patients. A lot of times around their medication adherence. Okay, what are the pills that you have? Do you have a pill box? Do you have it organized? Are you taking your medications? Are there any side effects? How can we better manage those side effects? Are you taking it with food? Are you not taking it with food? Are there things about your diet and the things around your house that affect your chronic condition, etc., etc.? Okay, why is it so important to have a warm handoff between this acute care nurse case manager, who's been seeing the patient daily in the hospital, and community case management and disease management? It is because the vast majority of patients, when they are contacted by community case managers or disease managers, they do not answer the phone.

They do not communicate with them. Therefore, if this nurse case manager in the hospital actually identifies patients that are good candidates for it and are open to it, then they will actually take the call from the community case manager and the disease manager after the hospitalization. That's hugely important. It saves so much time for being wasted trying to contact these people who will never pick up the phone. And it also dramatically increases the contact rates for these people because the pump has already been primed during the inpatient stay.

Because there's been a relationship form. That's why they have to be seen daily in person. Because they form a relationship with them. And they establish trust. And they say, look, you could really benefit from this community or this disease management program. And they're like, I trust you. Let's get them on the phone with you now. Let's introduce you to Sherry or Steve or whatever. So let's have a three-way conversation with them now so you can get to know them. And the trust can be transferred from me to that person.

Hugely effective. Okay. Now, so I said at the beginning that, look, there's already other case managers. You got the hospital case manager. And guess what? They're in person at the hospital. But that hospital case manager is not accountable for continuity. Likewise, there's an insurance case manager. They're not there in person. And so, like, they never establish a relationship. But they do have responsibility for continuity. But the only case manager that is both in person and accountable and responsible for continuity is the primary care nurse case manager.

And when these types of case managers have been used, they have reduced readmissions for congestive heart failure from 53% to 18%. That's right. If you came in with CHF, there was the flip wheel coin, 50-50 chance that you were going to be readmitted. And they got it down to 18%. So the secret weapon to primary care is actually managing the hospitalization with a nurse case manager from the primary care physician's practice. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching AgHealthcareZ..

