Title: Nursing Home Zero COVID Infections_Ds3LqKL4GRI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ds3LqKL4GRI
Language: en
Duration: 4:50
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is a nursing home with zero COVID infections. So this story comes from the Baltimore Sun on June 18th of 2020 and it is awesome. It's a microcosm of a major problem in healthcare. So to start out with, here's the humdinger of coronavirus in America. 42% of coronavirus deaths are in people in nursing homes and assisted living facilities that only make up 0.62% of the population. Look at that. The coronavirus, as many of you already know, is just horrible for nursing homes.

Now, there is a nursing home in West Baltimore that not only has zero coronavirus deaths, it has zero coronavirus infections. Not a single person there has gotten coronavirus. They have no COVID there. So this article from the Baltimore Sun talks about, well, what did they do? Well, one, they started early when they got first wind of coronavirus in America, when there are only 15 cases of coronavirus in America on February 26th, they got started. Two, they had an infection control nurse already on staff. They already had a dedicated person setting up protocols, training on those protocols, and ensuring that those protocols were followed already.

So they already had a rubric in place for infection control. Next up, they put in a bunch of additional measures. They said, no visitors. No, the non-patient care staffs. In other words, if they had clerks or the accountant or whatever, they worked from home. They didn't go into the nursing home. They got extra PPE right away. They started extra cleaning by the janitorial staff. They asked the staff that did work with the residents to not travel. They had a daily questionnaire for the staff when they showed up to work about their physical health and their home conditions.

They checked this daily. They checked people's temperatures three times a day. Not once, not twice, but three times a day. They had the residents who were able to wear masks. They got rid of communal eating. They, what do a lot of people in nursing homes do? They sit in close proximity watching one television. What did they do? They got more TVs so that people wouldn't have to congregate around one. They could be spread out and do social distancing. Now, they did even more than this. There is so much stuff, I can't even fit it on the board.

But the point, the point that this illustrates with healthcare is that healthcare is a services business. And services, by definition, are highly variable. Anybody who's ever gotten a bad haircut knows that services are highly variable. Now, why is it that they're highly variable? It's because the attention to detail, which makes the service good or not good, is highly variable. Look at the attention to detail at this nursing home. That is why they have been so successful. Okay, so fine. Do we rely upon just the individual astuteness and diligence of people to afford the attention to detail? No! That is a horrible way to ensure attention to detail, is to just think that every person is going to individually be responsible for it.

No! You put in place protocols. You systematize it. You create the protocols. You adapt the protocols. You train on the protocols. And you ensure that the protocols are being followed. Okay, that is the only way you can routinize attention to detail. And that is the only way that you can decrease the variability of service performance and therefore improve the service. So, this West Baltimore nursing home is a microcosm of what needs to happen in healthcare. So, my point for today is just know that when you're walking into any healthcare institution, whether it be a nursing home or a hospital or a doctor's office, that it is a services business.

It's highly variable. The quality of that service is dependent upon the attention to detail. And so, to the extent that the office or the nursing home or the hospital does or does not have protocols, will likely determine its success. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare to See..

