Title: Ob_Gyn Doctors_ Independent vs. Employed... Which is Better___-eWMTsCaQnA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-eWMTsCaQnA
Language: en
Duration: 4:34
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and today I'd like to speak with you about OBGYNs, independent versus employed obstetricians and gynecologists. Now there are about 40,000 OBGYNs in America and overall 78% of all physicians are employed. And when I say employed, I mean either by a hospital system or by an insurance company or by a private equity firm. So the majority of physicians, including OBGYNs, are employed these days. Now why would they be employed? Well it has to do with how much money you can make if you're employed versus independent.

So the income of an employed OBGYN is more. It's $361,000 per year, whereas an independent OBGYN only makes $323,000 a year. Well okay, why would an independent OBGYN make less? And it's because of the practice expense. So it has become much more expensive to run an independent OBGYN practice these days. So several decades ago, the practice expense was about 52% of the total OBGYN practice revenue. But now it's 71%. The practice expense is 71% of all the revenue that the OBGYN practice bring in. So why is that? Well, it's because the cost of running a practice has gone up and the relative reimbursement of the overall practice has gone down.

So it's increased the percentage of the practice expense. Now, it's not all sunshine and roses for employed OBGYNs. They're greatly dissatisfied. So 21%, so over a fifth of all employed OBGYNs are dissatisfied with the hours that they have to work and the number of patients that they see in those number of hours. It's too much. 16% of OBGYNs that are employed, they don't like all the rules. They don't like somebody else dictating how they practice medicine. And then 14% of the employed OBGYNs, they don't like the electronic health record system.

That's understandable. Interestingly, patients themselves actually prefer independent OBGYNs. That's right. There was a study that found that patient satisfaction scores were higher for independent OBGYNs versus employed OBGYNs. And we have heard directly from independent OBGYNs how much they have enjoyed the longitudinal relationships that they have with their patients. Sometimes OBGYNs even deliver the babies of babies that they had delivered 20, 30 years ago. So it's like multi-generational relationships that OBGYNs have with patients and their families.

Now, how can an OBGYN maintain independence or move from being employed to independence? Well, that can be done through increased services, increased types of services that the OBGYN practice provides. Now, successful OBG, independent OBGYN practices, they provide imaging services, lab services, family planning services, infertility services. They provide mammogram. Now, maintaining or even setting up all these services is super hard because OBGYNs are so busy themselves. They provide a lot of care for themselves.

Which is why I want to speak with you about Maroka, which is a company that specifically works with OBGYN practices to act as their non-medical business partner. They do not tell OBGYNs how to practice medicine. But as far as setting up and maintaining all of these services and all of sort of the business aspect of those services, that's exactly what Maroka does. And then Maroka also sets up the practice as an ESOP, an employee share ownership program, where the OBGYN physicians and the nurses and the various staff actually have ownership in the practice, which is super helpful in regards to decreasing turnover and for succession planning for when the older OBGYNs decide to retire.

So, I wanted to share with you today about OBGYNs and how they can move to independence or maintain independence with the help of Maroka. Thank you so much for watching..

