Title: Obamacare Health Insurance Family Glitch Explained_vgxCsCsrK_E
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E
Language: en
Duration: 5:39
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the ACA Family Glitch is not a glitch. Now the ACA Family Glitch is an actual term that many of you may be familiar with. It's been in place ever since the beginning of the Affordable Care Act. Now, people are only eligible for a government subsidy if they have no access to employer-sponsored health insurance that's considered affordable. And I put affordable here in quotation marks because there is a very specific definition of what affordable is.

So, an employee premium contribution, if it's less than 9.78% of their household income, then that employer-sponsored health insurance is deemed affordable. Keep in mind, that is the employee contribution for employee-only coverage. And this entire topic is the result of a telephone conversation I had last week with an actual person that is affected by this. Okay? So, I was on the phone with Mr. S. And S is the first letter of his first name. He lives in the Dallas-Fort Worth area. He's married. He's about 35. He's got four children, ages 16, 12, 9, and 5.

Three girls and one boy. And he has a job that he just got, oh, about four or five months ago that pays $6,500 a month. Pretty good. Okay. He has employee-only coverage through his job. His employer does not pay any of the dependent coverage. He would have to pay for it all himself. He pays $80 a month for his individual coverage. And that works out to about $960 a year. And so, if you use the Kaiser family numbers, then his employee-only premium is about $7,188. So, basically, he's paying about $1,000 and his employer is paying about $6,200 for that total of $7,188.

Okay. Now, let's take into account the total family premium. So, according to Kaiser, the average family premium is $20,576. So, if you back out the $7,188 that is being paid for the individual premium, then what you're left with is $13,388 a year that Mr. S himself would have to pay in order to cover his wife and his four children. Now, if you take into account, point number four, if you take into account Mr. S's income, you take the $6,500 and you multiply it by 12, he makes $78,000 a year. That's pretty good, right? That's greater than the average for the American working household.

And if you take the $13,000 that he would have to pay in premium to cover his dependents, that means that Mr. S would have to, and his family, would have to pay 17% of their household income in order to cover the entire family with health insurance. And guess what? That 17% is more than the 9.78% that the ACA says is considered affordable. But the problem is total family premium is not used to calculate affordability. I'll say that again. Total family premium is not used to calculate affordability. It's only the individual premium that's used to calculate affordability.

And that is the glitch. But now, let me explain to you, well, this is not a glitch at all. Because glitch implies a mistake. This was not a mistake. This was a, why does this glitch occur? However, it occurs because of a conscious decision by the Joint Committee on Taxation, which is a committee within Congress that decides how laws that are passed are going to be executed by the IRS. So basically, the IRS is following along in terms of tax penalization with the recommendations from the Joint Committee on Taxation from Congress.

And the Joint Committee on Taxation, or the JCT, specifically said that they did not want to penalize employers that do provide some family coverage. In other words, there's a ton of employers that do provide some degree of payment or subsidy for the premium for the employees. So the individual employee themselves might not have to pay 17% of their income for family coverage. But maybe they had to pay 10%, okay? If you use the 9.78% for affordability for family coverage, then those employees that had to pay 10% of their household income for total family coverage, because the employer was actually paying for, you know, some of the family premium, then those employers would be penalized.

So essentially, the Joint Committee on Taxation was protecting those employers that actually did provide some degree of premium subsidy for family members. Now, given the election that's coming up, will that change? I don't know, but I thought this was a very interesting intersection of individual Obamacare benefits and employer-sponsored health planning group benefits and how the two interact. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

