Title: Obamacare True Story   40_ of Government Assistance Spent on Health Insurance_Q4iPJ9y57DU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q4iPJ9y57DU
Language: en
Duration: 5:46
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is a true story about an Obamacare sign-up. So as you know through Texas Family Insurance, I'm actually an insurance broker and I'm actually signing up people for ACA Obamacare plans in Texas because unemployment is higher now. A lot of people have lost their employer sponsored employee benefits health insurance and frankly the drug coverage is super important for especially for people that are on chronic medication. Like insulin because they used to pay like a $40 copay for insulin and now they're paying like $400 for insulin so the extent that we can get them back on insurance to get the prescription drug benefit, it's not a perfect solution.

I mean obviously there's a gazillion ways that we can poke holes in that but it's better than nothing and I'm going to tell you a true story which is fascinating. So, I was on the phone for about 45 minutes this past week with a 61-year-old woman who lives in San Antonio. Now she makes $14,478 a year and she gets that in, she's a widower and she gets that in widow benefits from Social Security. Now, her health insurance plan that we signed her up for was going to have, she qualifies for an Obamacare ACA subsidy of $843 a month which comes out to you multiply that by 12 is $10,166 a year.

And you're like, holy moly, when you start doing the math on that, comparing, okay, she's getting a government subsidy for just over $10,000. She's getting government money, that's almost equal to how much she's getting in Social Security, right? She's only getting $14,000 in Social Security. So, I'm just thinking, I'm like, almost, look at that, 41% of all the money that she is getting from the government is for her health insurance. Like, that's unreal. And the health insurance company, let's say their loss ratio is the 85%, that means the health insurance company is getting about $1,517.

And then they pay me a commission which essentially amounts to $250. And I'm not even coming out ahead on this. You know what I spend all my money on? It's all on Facebook ads. So, if anything, it's a government subsidy of Facebook ads to actually promote their own Obamacare health insurance program. And I will tell you that this woman did not understand, like, how ACA works. It's her first year signing up. She never signed up before. She really didn't understand how it worked at all. And she asked me a question.

She's like, hey, I've got a 41-year-old friend. Could they sign up for it, too? I'm like, of course they could sign up for it, too. It depends upon their income, yada, yada, yada. But the point is, is that there still is a tremendous amount of lack of understanding around this. And, I mean, just look at how, I mean, at the end of the day, the health insurance companies and the hospitals and the doctors and farms, I mean, look at that. The government has decided that of all the money that they're going to give this woman, that 41% of it should go towards health insurance and health care.

I mean, think of what she could have done with that $10,000, right? So then it ends up her premium is going to be $34.95 a month. And it's a decent, in my opinion, it's a pretty decent plan. It's a zero-deductible plan. And it's got $35 primary care visit office co-pays. I think the specialist co-pays are $55. So it's like reasonably, and she gets, you know, free annual visits. She gets free telemedicine. So I would argue it's like reasonably affordable for her, right? Again, it's not perfect. It's reasonable. Okay.

But then we think about, okay, well, what about her life and her health? Like health insurance and seeing the doctor, like being able to go to the hospital, that doesn't even like guarantee her health, right? Because we've got these social determinants of health. And I'm sure many of you have seen the statistics where like the majority of like what contributes to a person's health is not health care. It's all these social determinants of health, right? Things like income stability. Things like education.

Things like housing. Things like community support. You know, people in her lives, in her life. Transportation. Education. Like what if you took some of this $10,000 and, you know, you could give it all to her in the form of income so that she had $24,000 instead of $14,000. What if you did, she wants to work. She had a job and she lost it because of coronavirus. Like what if you went into like education, job training for her? Or I don't know if she's, she lives in an apartment. I don't know if she's getting subsidy in her housing or not.

You know, is she, is it a good apartment or not a good apartment? I don't know. I don't know how she gets around San Antonio. She has to take the bus or if she got like subsidized bus fare if that would help her out. And that's not my point. I am not here to have a policy discussion of whether or not it is philosophically right for the government to provide her with this money or not. That is not my point. You can have your own opinion about that. That's totally fine. My point is, is that the government has decided how to allocate that money.

And that allocation of money is heavily skewed toward, again, it's not $14,000 that she gets from the government. It's $24,000 that she gets from the government. And her, that money is heavily skewed. 41% skewed in the direction of health insurance and healthcare. Where in terms of like actually making her healthier, there's potentially other things that that money could have been spent on that actually would have made her more healthy. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

