Title: Older Doctors Selling Out to Private Equity_u_C5KnMsW0M
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C5KnMsW0M
Language: en
Duration: 7:15
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is older doctors selling out and their implications. So today's topic is about private equity backed partial group purchases. This is where private equity firms either directly or through forming shell companies will go out and buy not all but they'll buy a portion of a physician group practice. And let's work through the math on what their offer looks like in terms of the finances. So the private equity firm will offer an upfront lump sum amount of money to the partners, the physician partners in the practice plus they'll offer administrative services.

So they'll take care of all of the billing, all of the collections, to a certain extent they may even take care of all of the hiring and HR for all the supporting staff so that the physicians can just be doctors, can just do the doctoring thing. The private equity firm says we'll just take all that off your hands. You just see patients and we'll take care of the rest. Now on top of that, that comes at a cost. It comes at okay the private equity firm or shell company whatever you want to call it says okay but we're going to take 30 to 40 percent of your revenue.

So we're literally going to take over your NPI numbers and for every dollar that is collected, we're going to take 30 to 40 cents of it and you're going to keep the balance 30 to 70 percent or 60 to 70 percent of it. Okay now the lump sum that these private equity firms are giving physicians, again this is just the older doctors who are typically the partners in the practice, okay that payout is equivalent to 10 to 20 years of their income. So if you just do the math on it, if the physician is 50 years old and was going to retire at 60, then they could just take the payout now and come out even as it comes to the money and they don't have to work anymore.

Likewise if the payout is 20 years worth they might be like 40 and they might want to retire or do something else at the age of 40. Okay so the payout is huge. It's not even significant. It's beyond significant. It's a huge payout for these older physicians that are partners in their existing practice. Now what the problem is though is that when those older doctors sell out, the younger doctors will then see a decrease in their pay, right? So because the private equity firm has taken 30 to 40 percent off the top, then that's money that typically would have gone to the younger junior.

Now keep in mind this also is a decreased income for the partners in the practice, but they got the lump sum. So they are, they're sitting with this huge lump sum. So yes, they're going to get paid less on a monthly basis going forward, but they got the lump sum up front. The younger doctors, they never got the lump sum and they're going to see a decrease in their income. Okay, so now there's employer implications for this as well. There's employer implications is that when the private equity firm makes this deal and they control the physicians NPI numbers, they also control the commercial insurance contract and they are amassing very large groups of physicians so that they can have greater leverage with the insurance carrier networks so that they can increase their unit cost reimbursement.

So instead of getting paid $180 for every MRI, they're going to get paid $360 for every MRI. And instead of getting paid $800 to administer anesthesia, they're going to get paid $1,600 to administer anesthesia. So the goal of this is to, now you can't charge Medicare more, right, because Medicare sets the rates. But the goal is to have more negotiating leverage with the commercial insurance carriers to jack up the professional fee reimbursement from Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna to these large physician groups.

Okay, now the bill charges, a lot of these contracts for these physician groups are already percent of charge discounts. I shouldn't say a lot, some. Some of these commercial insurance contracts are already percent of charge discounts and it's like a huge amount, it's like an 80% discount off of billed charges with the insurance carrier. So sometimes the physician practice, they don't even need to renegotiate their contract. They just need to go to their charge master and their billed charges and be like, look, right now we're billing $1,000, we're giving the insurance carrier an 80% discount, so we're only getting paid $200 from Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna.

So what they say is, shoot, why stop at $1,000? Why not charge $10,000? And that way we would get paid $2,000 instead of $200. And they do that. I had a radiology practice bill my family and the head of their radiology practice specifically tell me that they do that on purpose. That is one of their strategies to increase their reimbursement from insurance carriers. Okay, now regardless of if it's a private equity firm, it could be a hospital that is acquiring the physician practice. And they have a similar structure in terms of the upfront lump sum payout and then a decrease in the monthly payment that they pay the physician because the hospital's taken a larger percentage of the revenue.

So to a certain extent, it doesn't matter if it's a private equity firm or a hospital and if the hospital is for profit or not for profit, but these types of deals, what that means is, what this overall means is that, in this case, the hospital system is using their negotiating clout to increase the negotiating power with the insurance carriers as opposed to the large physician practice from the private equity firm. Okay, so what does this mean? What's the bottom line? The bottom line is, increase unit costs for professional services.

Again, instead of getting paid $108 per MRI they read, getting paid $360 per MRI they read. Okay, next up, a decrease in the actual doctor payment. So even though the overall professional services reimbursement is going up, the doctor payment is going down, right? Because those older doctors took the lump sum up front in exchange for either the investors in the case of the private equity firm or the hospital is getting paid more. And so then if I show this on a graph here where the x-axis is time and the y-axis is the amount of money being paid, the total amount being paid, that top line is going up because of the greater negotiating cloud with commercial insurance payers.

The amount of money to the investors is going from zero when they don't own the hospital, when they don't own the physician practice, and it's going to go up, whereas the physician reimbursement or the physician take-home pay is going to go down. So, older, now, I am not going to judge these older physicians. What if somebody came to you and said, I'm going to give you the equivalent of you working for the next 10 to 20 years, and you can take it now and do what you want with it? What would you do for your family? What would you do for your kids that you need to send to college? I mean, I think it costs like $80,000 a year to send your kids to Emory in Atlanta.

And I'm not saying everybody wants to go to Emory, but the point is, what would you do if you got this kind of offer? I would argue that many of us would take the offer, even if we knew that the implications were that our colleagues would be paid less, even if we knew that we were contributing to the overall inflation of healthcare costs as a result of taking this deal. So, I'm not here to pass judgment, but I'm just saying, this is what's happening, and these are the implications of what's happening.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

