Title: Opioids_ Pareto_ Registries and COVID Money_y1kG0YJPTQw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y1kG0YJPTQw
Language: en
Duration: 8:22
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and welcome to A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is opioids, the Pareto Principle, registries, and COVID money. Now, we start off with The Pharmacist, which was a series of shows on Netflix that came out in the beginning of 2020. And if you have not seen this, I highly recommend that you watch it. It is about a New Orleans, Louisiana area pharmacist by the name of Dan Schneider, who finds that there is a physician in his area who is essentially operating an opioid pill mill. This physician has people at her office all hours of the night, and eventually when, you know, the FBI and the DEA and the feds, etc., etc., eventually when they raid her office, they find stacks and stacks of cash and they find stacks and stacks of prescriptions that have already been filled out minus just the name of the person because she would write the exact same prescription for everyone, no matter what.

Now, obviously, eventually, she got shut down, and it's a very long story, and it's fascinating. It also then goes beyond that to Purdue Pharmaceuticals, the makers of Oxycontin, and the Sackler family, which are the founders of Purdue. So it is a fantastic documentary series. I highly encourage you to watch it. But it got me thinking about, well, what were the overall DEA convictions for doctors for essentially running pill mills where, you know, one, there was just a ridiculous number of opioids that they were writing, but there was also no, like, medical purpose for this.

Like, there was no, like, medical documentation that could justify what they were doing in terms of these prescription medications. Now, what we have here on this chart is the number of convictions of doctors per year and then the years on the x-axis. So it starts in 2003, goes all the way up to 2018. It's actually on the DEA's website. I mean, it's fantastic information. I'll leave a link to it in the show notes. Now, you can see that it starts out at less than 10 convictions per year. And even in the movie The Pharmacist, they say, look, you know, going after a doctor's, like, criminal charges against doctors.

But believe it or not, in the early 2000s and late 90s, that was, like, almost unheard of. Like, doctors were, like, sacrosanct. You did not go after them. But that changed, right? So it went all, it immediately went up with the early days of the opioid epidemic to, we're talking 30, 40, and it peaked in 2008 and 2009 with approximately 55 convictions of doctors each of those years. And then it quickly dropped back off. Now, let's assume that it quickly dropped back off because a lot of the activities by the physicians were changed.

In other words, there was a change that's overprescribing. Not that the DEA stopped doing their job, etc., etc. Now, I don't know if these DEA numbers capture, like, all of the convictions, whether there were some things at the state or local level that happened as well. But it might act as a proxy for those. Okay. So, so fine. So you had this huge spike. It came back down in terms of doctor convictions. Overall, it spiked at, like, 56 doctors a year. There are 954,000 doctors in America. So in terms of, like, the absolute number of physicians on a percentage basis, in terms of the doctors in America, it's nothing.

It's like a drop in the bucket. And it points out that when they rated Dr. Clegett, who was that physician running the pill mill in the New Orleans area, they found that she had written prescriptions for 180,000 pills. Which brings me to the Pareto Principle, that sort of famous 80-20 rule, right, that says that 80% of the consequences are only due to 20% of the causes. In other words, to a certain extent, prescription opioid abuse, the ridiculous amount of prescribing was probably only done by a very small number of physicians, right? And so that then got me thinking, okay, well, what if you did a histogram of, you know, the number of doctors on the y-axis and the number of blank whatever on the x-axis? And in this case, since we're talking about opioids, it could be, like, the number of opioid prescriptions.

And it would probably be some sort of bell-shaped curve, where the majority of physicians were kind of in the middle in terms of the number of opioid prescriptions they were writing. But then there were a few people out here on the very edge that were outliers that were writing a very high number of prescriptions. And you could replace the word opioid prescription with gastroenterologists that are doing endoscopies, interventional cardiologists and vascular surgeons that are putting in stents, orthopedists that are doing joint replacements, ophthalmologists that are doing ilea and lucentist injections for macular disease, okay? And the reason that that stratification or that Pareto principle is so important is because you can't know this until there is a registry.

And that was one of the central things that allowed the DEA to identify these high opioid prescription writers was that they developed a registry. Before the early 2000s, there was no registry. And guess what? For things like endoscopies and stents and joints and all those things, there is no centralized registry. And that's super important, right? Because some of the stuff is in the Medicare data, some of the stuff's in the Medicaid data, and then some of the stuff is in each of the individual Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna health insurance carrier claims data.

So it's in all these different places. And man, it would be super helpful if you could put it all into one registry, so you could actually create this histogram. And then you could also take that registry, and on the x-axis, you could literally name every single doctor in whatever specialty, etc, etc, on the x-axis. And then on the y-axis, you could have the number of blank procedures or opioid prescriptions or cardiac stents place. And you would see that the vast majority of people would have this sort of like, you know, typical or low number.

And then up here, these outliers here would have super high numbers. And then you could identify who those people are. And you could say, okay, are those medically legitimate because they just have fantastic reputations, and they have this huge patient draw. And all these people from all over the country go to this person to get x, y, z done. And that's why they do so many. And you could look at their charts, and you could see how it was clinically justified or not clinically justified. There's a number of things you could do to be like, are these outliers correct? Or are they doing something nefarious? Okay, and this brings me to the COVID money.

The United States government has given out over $100 billion to doctors and hospital systems with essentially no strings attached. Now, creating centralized registries around and reporting for endoscopies and stents and joints and all these other things to find the outliers. Because the quote-unquote, people always say, well, the vast majority of doctors are doing the right thing. And that is correct. The vast majority of doctors are doing the right thing. But without registries, you can't identify the outliers.

And it's the outliers that need to be identified. So how about we take some of this coronavirus money and put some strings attached to it? Why don't we put some things like, oh, if you get coronavirus money, then over the next five years, you're going to put in a registry for x, y, z. And you need to be compliant with that. And look, that's just one idea. My point is, if we're spending all this money, there are constructive things that we can do for patient safety that have not been done on their own by doctors and hospitals that with all this money, it might behoove us to do that.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

