Title: Opioid Crisis in Context_DuN5Icfpzuw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DuN5Icfpzuw
Language: en
Duration: 4:02
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the opioid crisis in context. Now, if anybody ever watches the news, you probably know that there are crises everywhere. I feel like there's almost like a crisis of crises. And so when we hear about the opioid epidemic, it's hard to put that in context of, okay, well, you know, is it a crisis? Is it not a crisis? Well, it's not a question of if it is or is not a crisis. It's just a question of let's look at the rational numbers and put those in context, okay? Now, 47,600 people died of an opioid overdose in 2017.

Now, when I say overdose, that's important because this is an accidental death. Keep in mind, this is an accident, okay? So in other words, 47,600 people died of an accident. And oh, by the way, the cause of that accident was an opioid pill, okay? Now, has it grown? There were only 8,000 deaths from opioid overdoses in 1999. That is a 6,000% growth in only 18 years. So yes, this is a new problem. It was a problem back in 1999, but not nearly the problem that it is now. So that problem has grown. Okay, next up, how do we compare it to other accidental deaths? Well, what's a major cause of accidental death? Automobile accidents, okay? There are 37,000 deaths in America from automobiles.

Okay, notice, more than 10,000 people a year more died of opiate overdoses than from automobiles. And think of all the safety regulations that we have in airbags and seatbelts, etc., car seats, etc., etc. Now, we don't even have close to the safety regulations in line for opioids. Now, let's compare it to other medical illnesses like cancer. Okay, 42,000 people a year die from breast cancer. That's a big deal. More people die from opioids. 32,000 people a year die from prostate cancer. More people die from opioids.

51,000 people die a year from colon cancer. It's about the same number as opioids. Think about all the awareness campaigns. Think about all the screening. Think about all the work that employers do. Think about the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force for recommendations for screening for these things, that colonoscopies, the mammograms. And opioid deaths are comparable, if not more. Okay, now, in terms of, like, new causes of death during my lifetime, this is absolutely one of them. And another one that happened was AIDS.

Now, 50,000 people died in the AIDS epidemic in 1995, and that was the peak year. That was the year that most people died from AIDS. Notice, that's almost the same number as opioid deaths. The number of deaths per year in opioids is equivalent to the AIDS epidemic at its peak. So, I mean, whether you want to call it a crisis or an epidemic, it's comparable. It's a big deal. Think about everything that has happened in terms of AIDS awareness and treatment and research and funding for AIDS. And now, like, we're talking about a comparable problem in terms of the number of deaths per year.

Okay, now, AIDS has improved a lot. It's going down to 10,000 per year. So, it's still a problem, but it's gotten better. Okay, now, is there, was there some sort of genetic mutation that happened over the last 18 years that caused people to all of a sudden just become, like, more addicted, to have, like, a more addictive personality? Do people all of a sudden just, like, experience, like, much more pain than they did 18 years ago? Again, was there a genetic mutation? Are we just, like, much more clumsy? Like, or, like, what's going on? Like, why? Why? And maybe, similarly to how AIDS, it was an exposure problem.

You were exposed to the virus. What if you thought of the opioid as like a virus and you were exposed to it? And so, maybe the potential solution for opioids is that it's an exposure problem. And so, maybe we need an exposure solution. Maybe we need to do something about the exposure to opioids. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

