Title: Orthopedic Surgery--Major Changes in Hospital Care and Payment_4JbMQqzAhWE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4JbMQqzAhWE
Language: en
Duration: 19:33
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is orthopedic surgery. A massive change in hospital care. Now, this is one of the coolest topics that I have covered in a while, in my opinion. And it comes from the GIST newsletter. And the GIST healthcare consulting firm puts out this Friday newsletter. I highly encourage you all to subscribe to it. And I'm not connected to them in any way other than the fact that I get the newsletter. But it is awesome. Now they do a graphic of the week.

And this week's graphic is about orthopedic surgery. And it was done in conjunction with a healthcare analytics firm called Stratasand. Now, again, I have no connection to either of these organizations. But what they have created is incredibly instructive about a major change in orthopedic surgery in healthcare today. And so what I've done is I've recreated this graphic here on the whiteboard. And it's got a ton of numbers. But we're going to go through it slowly. And it specifically relates to changes in total knee and total hip replacements.

So what you have here is a chart that shows the degree of total knee replacements that were performed in the hospital inpatient setting starting in 2017. And they set that at 100%. So all of the total knee replacements in America in 2017 were done in the inpatient setting. And then over time, it dramatically changed such that there was this huge drop in 2020 because of COVID, right? But notice that after the huge drop because of COVID and, you know, first there was the infection concern, but then there was just also the staffing.

They just didn't have the people to staff the OR so they had to shut down a lot of the operating rooms. Now, look. Now, it came back, but it is now only at 25% of the amount that it was in 2017. Now, I put an asterisk there because something hugely important happened in 2018. And what happened was, was that CMS, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, removed total knee replacements and total hip replacements from the inpatient only list. What does that list mean? Medicare would only pay for total knee and total hip replacements if they were done in the inpatient setting.

But they got rid of that rule. In other words, you could do them outpatient, you could do them at ASCs and get paid for it as of 2018. And look what happened in 2018. You start a little bit of outpatient total knee replacements, and then you have the dip because of COVID. And then look at that outpatient total knee replacements now make up 39% of all total knee replacements. And for ASCs, it's now 33% of all of total knee replacements. So this is a huge change. It used to be a hundred percent hospital inpatient.

Now it's only 25% hospital inpatient. And it has been largely replaced by hospital outpatient and ASC. Okay, what's the difference between a hospital outpatient and ASC? Okay, so hospital outpatient means they still use the operating rooms at the main hospital, but you just stay less, you know, you stay less than 24 hours. Like you go home the same day, it's same day surgery. And that's important because the majority of hospital surgeries are actually outpatient surgeries. So you have a lot of these surgeries now done in outpatient paces.

So that's interesting. That begs the question. So why were so many of these done in outpatient paces before? Because Medicare required it for payment. Look, for clinical purposes, the orthopedic surgeons feel like 39% of their patients can go home the same day. Now for clinical reasons, they still think that 25% need to stay overnight in the hospital for a day or two days or three days, what have you. But isn't that interesting that what drove the change was payment. This is why we talk about money on A Healthcare Z.

Because the clinical methodology is heavily, if not a hundred percent in this case, determined by the payment, not determined by the patient need. If Medicare back here had changed the rule before, you would have had 39% getting it done in the outpatient paces before. Now, it has other implications as well. So ASC is Ambulatory Surgery Center. Now, in the case of the outpatient hospital versus the inpatient hospital, for commercial insurance, it's still being run through the hospital contract. And so those facility fees for those major hospital systems are still very high for employer-sponsored insurance plans, for commercial insurance plans.

Now, a lot of Ambulatory Surgery Centers are also owned by hospital systems. In which case, there really is not a tremendous advantage in terms of lower facility fees for those employer-sponsored plans. However, there are a lot of independent Ambulatory Surgery Centers that have much lower cost structures and have much lower contracted rates, much lower allowed amounts with the commercial insurance carriers for employer-sponsored health plans. That means that for many of those 33% that are performed at ASCs, those are at much lower facility fees.

We're talking facility fees of anywhere from $30,000 to $75,000 for hospital inpatient and outpatient. And we're talking facility fees of much less than $15,000 at an Ambulatory Surgery Center. So we're talking upwards of like $60,000 of difference per surgery, per knee replacement, that employers are at employer-sponsored health plans are actually able to benefit from. So this is actually good for employer-sponsored health plans. This is good. This financially benefits. So if you look at your musculoskeletal cost for your knee replacements, like, you should look at your site of service and see how many of them have been done at ASCs.

And then look at your allowed amounts for the ones done at ASCs versus hospital inpatient or outpatient. And you'll see that the ASCs are probably lower and you're getting more of your plan members getting their knee replacements done at ASCs. That's helping you. It's not all doom and gloom here on A Healthcare Z for the employer-sponsored health plan. Here, this is like a birthday present you weren't even expecting. Many of you probably aren't even aware of this. This is a good thing for your overall cost rate.

Next, let's do the same analysis for total hip replacements. Again, total hip replacements used to be on the inpatient only list. CMS would only pay for total hip replacements if they were done in the inpatient setting. Then, the change, instead of being in 2018, the change was in the very end of 2019. Aha! Was it just a coincidence that it happened to happen at this time? No! Because it happened at the exact same time that CMS changed the rule for hip replacements. They changed the rule for hip replacements at a different time, and the change began for hip replacements at a different time.

Again, you had COVID in 20, and then inpatient hip replacements are now down to 37% of all hip replacements. Outpatient hip replacements are 40% of all hip replacements. And ASC hip replacements are now 21% of hip replacements. Back here, before the change at the end of 2019, outpatient and ASC total outpatients were almost zero. Again, the payment drove the clinical site of service. Not the patient need, the payment drove it. Now, what I also want to point out here is that if you add up the 25 plus the 39 plus the 33, you get up to 97%.

Which means that the rate of total knee replacements is almost back up to the same level it was in 2017. Likewise, for hip replacements, if you add up the 37 to the 40 to the 21, it adds up to 98%. So much of that surgical volume has come back. But if you're a hospital administrator and a hospital CFO, you essentially realize, no, no, no, no, no, no. Our knee and our hip replacements have not come back. Of course they haven't come back. Because you're not seeing all this ASC stuff. Like, it came back. It just didn't come back to you.

This is a huge financial problem for hospital systems. And the GIST newsletter points this out. It says, look, inpatient and outpatient, especially inpatient, orthopedic procedures like total knee and total hip replacements were huge cash cows for hospital systems. And it has diminished. So, there are, again, one person's gain is another person's loss. So, in this situation, again, employer-sponsored health plans are benefiting from this move to ASCs for their plan members. So, when the hospitals are losing revenue, who, where is that money going? It's staying in the pockets of employer-sponsored health plans.

This is a good thing for them. It's a bad thing for hospitals. Where you stand depends upon where you sit. Now, are you with me? Take a deep breath. We're moving on to part two. Now, they also broke down the site of service, ASC, outpatient and inpatient, I left it in the same order as up here, by the type of payer. So, this is confusing. So, I'm going to go through it slowly. So, for total knee replacements, for ASCs, 24% of all the ASC, total knee replacements, were traditional Medicare. 64% of the ASC, total knee replacements, were commercial insurance.

In other words, employer-sponsored insurance. And, 13% were either Medicare Advantage or Medicaid. The vast majority of that is going to be Medicare Advantage. Now, for the outpatient, total knee replacements, 56% was traditional Medicare. 33% was commercial insurance. And, 11% was Medicare Advantage, a little bit of Medicaid. And then, finally, for the inpatient, total knee replacements, 64% traditional Medicare Advantage. Excuse me, traditional Medicare. 25% commercial insurance. 11% Medicare Advantage, a little bit of Medicaid.

Great. What's the huge difference here? Inpatient and outpatient, traditional Medicare. And, the majority of the Medicare, and the Surgery Center, mostly commercial insurance. That has huge financial implications because the overall allowed amounts. When I set up here $75,000 for the allowed amount, that is a commercial. That's like a Blue Cross United, Cigna, CBS, Aetna. Okay, that's not a Medicare rate. Like, Medicare is only going to pay like 15 grand if you're doing like an inpatient total knee for the facility fee.

So, what does that mean? That all the money, the more lucrative commercial insurance, total knee replacements, have shifted from the hospital inpatient setting to the outpatient setting. So, not only are the hospitals losing total knee replacement volume, they're losing the more lucrative total knee replacement volume. They used to be getting $50,000 to $75,000 a pop for those knee replacements, and now they're going to an ASC, where the insurance carrier is only paying like $15,000, and the hospital's getting zero because they don't own the ASC in certain situations.

So, this is devastating. From a quote, the hospital system they call us payermix. So, this is hurting the payermix of the hospital system. And payermix is really a euphemism for, hey, how much commercial insurance business that pays me gobs of money am I getting? Okay, now, let's look at the same thing over here for hip replacements. So, ASCs, 20% traditional Medicare. Commercial insurance, 69% commercial insurance. 11% Medicare Advantage, a little bit of Medicaid. Okay. Outpatient, 51% traditional Medicare. 36% commercial insurance.

11% Medicare Advantage, a little bit of Medicaid. Inpatient total hip replacements, 65% traditional Medicare. 23% commercial insurance. 12% Medicare Advantage, a little bit of Medicaid. So, again, mirrors it, right? Vast majority of the total hip replacement revenue at ASCs is commercial insurance. Again, the better payers are going to, the higher reimbursement payers, better from a hospital standpoint, are now going to ASCs. And so, the payermix for the outpatient and the inpatient hospital total hip replacements is getting worse.

Now, things only look worse for hospitals because that entire inpatient only list from Medicare not only went away for total hip replacements in 2019 and total knee replacements in 2018, but it's going away for all surgical procedures in 2024. So, there is a huge, so guess what's going to happen to other inpatient procedures that can now be done on an outpatient basis because Medicare is going to pay for them on an outpatient basis. They're going to move the outpatients in ANCs. Aha. And there is significant hospital industry ramifications for this that we have already seen.

And I'm going to give you an example. One of the largest publicly traded for-profit hospital systems is Tenet. It's like the second largest after HCA. Tenet has shifted its strategy largely away from running huge acute care hospitals to now being, in fact, they even said that they want to become the preeminent provider of ambulatory surgery center services for musculoskeletal care. Hmm. I wonder why. Maybe because it has something to do with this change in the CMS reimbursement. Tenet now runs 310 ambulatory surgery centers in America, more than any other organization.

And just a few short years ago, seven years ago, in 2015, only 5% of their revenue came from ambulatory surgery centers. Now, in 2021, the most recent year that we have data for, it's 42%. It's gone up almost 9x. And this is only going to continue. Tenet is going to become an ASC company for all intents and purposes. So, again, that is a huge ramification for this change. Now, the final point I want to make, I was looking at this and I started scratching my head. And I started scratching my head about these very low Medicare Advantage Medicaid numbers.

And I'm like, okay, again, the vast majority of it's Medicare Advantage. Very little of it's Medicaid. Now, but let's just say all of it was Medicare Advantage. And there wasn't any Medicaid at all. So, in other words, you know, maybe 2 or 3 percentage points is actually Medicaid. So, maybe it's like 10% Medicare Advantage, 8% Medicare Advantage, 8% Medicare Advantage. But let's just say, let's just overestimate the Medicare Advantage. Let's say all of this is Medicare Advantage. Okay. Well, 45% of all Medicare beneficiaries are on Medicare Advantage.

And so, for like hospital inpatient and outpatient, if almost half of the total knee replacement patients are on traditional Medicare, then the payer mix should be about, okay, about maybe if 33%, that leaves you 66% left non-commercial insurance. That means that about 33% should be traditional Medicare and 33% should be Medicare Advantage. Likewise here, if you've got 75% that's not commercial insurance, then of that 75%, well, then maybe like, I don't know, you know, about 30, 33, you know, no, excuse me, 35% would be Medicare Advantage and 40% would be traditional Medicare.

So, the point is, is there's gobs more traditional Medicare payment than Medicare Advantage payment. There's gobs more traditional Medicare payment for knee replacements and for hip replacements than Medicare Advantage patients. Why is that? Because traditional Medicare does not have prior authorization and Medicare Advantage does. So, unless people with Medicare Advantage, just like, maybe people who sign up for Medicare Advantage have no osteoarthritis in their knees and their hips. Just as they just, for some reason, they just don't have it.

So, they don't need knee and hip replacements. Aha! The main difference is the prior authorization. And that is a huge difference, right? That's a 5 to 6x difference in the level or the frequency of total knee and total hip replacements in traditional Medicare versus Medicaid. Now, that means a couple of things. It could mean that way too many people with traditional Medicare are getting total knee and total hip replacements. Or, it could mean way too few people on Medicare Advantage are getting total knee and total hip replacements.

I don't know. It might be a combination of the both. There might be some people in traditional Medicare getting knee replacements, shouldn't be getting them, and there's probably people on Medicare Advantage who, like, need knee replacements and their prior authorization is, like, stopping them from getting what they really need. It's probably a combination of the two. But, as a consumer, if you're trying to choose between traditional Medicare and Medicare Advantage, just know that if you, like, want, let's say you just want a knee replacement or you want a hip replacement, you should go on traditional Medicare.

You should not go on Medicare Advantage because Medicare Advantage significantly puts the kibosh on total joint replacements. So, I'm going over gobs of statistics today. You've been so kind to follow along with me. But, the final point I want to make here is that, look, this is a huge change within healthcare that happened within a short period of time, three to four years, super fast. How did that happen? Because, one, a change in payment. CMS changed the way they paid. And then, two, the pandemic. We had a catalyst, right? And all the orthopedic surgeons had to cancel their OR schedules in the hospital because they didn't have staff and yada, yada, yada.

And all the orthopedic surgeons were like, screw this. Like, I'm not going to deal with this anymore when I can just go to an ASC and they don't have to deal with those COVID staffing problems. And I can put somebody on the schedule and I'm not going to get canceled because the hospital is not going to call me up and say, oh, we've got to shut down the OR because we don't have enough nurses. So, this is a seismic shift because of a change in payment and a catalyst. So, just know, we've talked about how healthcare change is slow and yada, yada, yada.

But just know that if you change the way things are paid for and if you have some sort of catalyst, like, things can change in healthcare. Like, it's not totally petrified. You can have rapid change. And this orthopedic surgery example is a fantastic one. And thank you for watching A Healthcare to See..

