Title: Patient Trust in Healthcare_ 84_ Trust Doctors_ 33_ Health Insurance Companies_xkfCiAgXr0k
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xkfCiAgXr0k
Language: en
Duration: 6:27
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is patient trust in healthcare. So the ABIM, which is the American Board of Internal Medicine, conducted a survey just this year in January of 2021 in regards to trust in healthcare. Now the ABIM is the organization that sort of certifies or gives accreditation to interns such as myself. Now, what did they find in their survey? They found that the group of healthcare professionals that have the highest level of trust is nurses.

That's no surprise. 85% of their respondents said that they trust nurses. 84% of their respondents said that they trust doctors. 56% of their respondents said that they trust the government as it relates to healthcare. 34% trust pharmaceutical companies and 33% trust health insurance companies. Okay, so you can see that it drops off significantly. Now, they also asked them how they trust hospitals and 72% of the respondents said they trust hospitals. Now, that's certainly not as high as nurses and doctors, but it certainly is higher than the government, pharmaceutical companies, and insurance companies.

Now, interestingly, the ABIM also surveyed doctors and they asked doctors, do you trust hospital executives? And only 53%, so about half of doctors said they trust hospital executives. They're like, whoa, that is a significant statistic. You mean to tell me the large building and organizations that doctors practice in? Like, only half the doctors actually trust them? Like, that was shocking to me. Shockingly low. Now, why is it that I'm talking about trust today? Well, obviously in healthcare, many of us want things to change because we're just not satisfied, especially as it comes to what's going on for patients, right? The cost is too high.

The quality is too variable. There's not enough access. It's not equal enough across the population. So, we need things to change. Well, there's a model for change that was started way back in ancient Greece, and it was in regards to persuasion. And the ancient Greeks, smart people that they were, they said, look, it relies on ethos, pathos, and logos to persuade someone. Ethos is one's credibility. Pathos is the ability to empathize with another person. In other words, put yourself in their shoes. And then logos is the logic.

So, notice it goes in this order. First, you have to establish credibility and trust. And then you have to empathize and understand the other person. And then, and only then, can you use logic. So, logic comes at the very end after empathy and credibility and trust. So, therefore, trust has to come first. So, when we're talking about changing the healthcare system, we need to understand who trusts who and who doesn't trust who. So, my question to all of us is, can insurance companies really drive patient behavior change when only 33% of patients actually trust health insurance companies? And then, can hospital executives really drive doctor behavior change when only about half of doctors trust hospital executives? So, I think we can change healthcare, but I think we need to be realistic about where that change is going to come from.

And that change comes from trusted relationships. Now, let's look a little bit more at who doctors trust, right? Because if patients trust doctors and nurses so much, well, who in the world do doctors trust? Guess who they trust? Shocker. They trust other doctors. So, they trust, 94% of the doctors that they surveyed trust other doctors in their practice. And that kind of makes sense, right? Because they are doctors that they're familiar with, that they know, that they interact with. Now, it drops off somewhat that doctors only trust 85% of other doctors out there that they don't know.

So, I don't know. That doesn't really seem super high. It doesn't really seem super low. Kind of seems in the middle to me. Now, interestingly, doctors, of the doctor respondents, 78% trust the government. Okay, so trust in the government among doctors is higher than the general public's trust in the government. All right, general public's trust in the government in regards to health issues is only 56%. The physicians themselves trust in the government is 78%. So, it's higher. Okay? Now, interestingly, doctors trust in pharmaceutical companies.

Only 47%. Wow, that tells you something. If the makers of drugs themselves, medications themselves, only like less than half of doctors actually trust pharmaceutical companies. And then only 19% of doctors trust insurance companies. So, it's even lower than what the patient trust is of insurance companies. So, if we're going to see how patient behavior change is going to change, let's say within an employer health plan population, then we have to look at, okay, well, who are those employees going to trust? Well, they're going to trust nurses and doctors.

Okay. And so, if we're going to influence those doctors, how are we going to do that? Then we're going to have to do that through other physicians, which this video today is not about how to do that. But this video today is about how not to do that. And it sounds like trying to change patient behavior change through an insurance company, probably a bad idea because there's no trust. And changing doctor behavior through a health insurance company, it's also probably a bad idea because there isn't any trust there.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

