Title: Pharmacy to PBM _Switch Operators_ Front Run Employer Health Insurance Plans_zPrlXNwJGqA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zPrlXNwJGqA
Language: en
Duration: 5:47
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker with A Healthcare Z. New Year 2021. New video. So let's get right back on the horse where we left off. So pharmacy switch operators is our topic for today. Now, believe it or not, between the pharmacy where you go to get your medication filled and the PBM, there is a software service run by a couple of companies that's called a switch. Sometimes they call it a clearinghouse, but the industry term for it is actually a switch. And what that switch does is it allows the planned information from the PBM in regards to what medications are on formulary or not on formulary and what the particular copay or coinsurance is, or if they even have a pharmacy deductible, if that pharmacy deductible has an accumulator, if they've reached that at all.

The pharmacy doesn't get that straight from the PBM. They don't get it from Express Scripts. They don't get it from CVS Caremark. What they do is they get it from this switching company. Now, who are these switching companies? Well, guess who owns one of them? McKesson owns Relay Health, which according to the CEO of one of the PBMs, and I'll leave a link in the show notes to the interview of this PBM CEO. McKesson's Relay Health runs 75% of the pharmacy switching market. And there's only two companies. The other company is Change Healthcare, which used to be called MDion, and they run the other 25%.

Yeah, there might be a couple other minor players, but the vast majority of switching is only run by two companies. Okay, listen, that might be a valuable service, right, so that you don't have to have some sort of software connection between the pharmacy and the PBM. You just go through this middleman, and they help disseminate the information. Okay, fine. Okay, it's a little suspect that it's so highly concentrated with a duopoly with only two firms, but let's see how this duopoly then exploits their central position.

So here again, we have a basically representation of that picture again. So you got the pharmacy, the switch, and the PBMs. The drug companies then enter into not only a contractual relationship with the switch, but also an electronic relationship with the switch. Such that, and listen, the switch sells this service to the pharmaceutical company. And what does it do? It facilitates the coupons. Because the switch could automatically put the coupon on the patient out-of-pocket cost when it shows the cost to the pharmacy.

And that's exactly what the switch does. Except they don't call it coupons. McKesson's Relay specifically calls it the eVoucherRx program. And they advertise it. I'll leave a link in the show notes to how, listen, and it is the pharmaceutical company that they are advertising this service to. Because it automatically applies the quote-unquote savings of the coupon at the point of the prescription being filled. Now, let's go through a specific example so you can see how the math works. So let's say the person goes in with a brand-name medication.

Let's say it's tier three and it's going to be $400 a month. And per the plan design of their employer as, you know, assisted by their broker benefit consultant, let's say they either have an $80 copay or let's say they've got 20% coinsurance, so it's $80 that they would have to pay out of pocket. Now, the pharmaceutical company goes ahead and says, look, we've got a voucher for $75. So the patient would only have to pay $5. The plan would continue to pay $320. And this would happen because it would prevent the patient from maybe switching to the $4 generic if there's a $4 generic in the same class or in the same category of medications.

So it keeps the adherence or the compliance to the expensive branding medication instead of switching to the generic instead of switching to the generic. Look, and even the PBM is a wants this to happen because they get the large rebate payment off the $320, so it keeps the adherence or the compliance to the expensive brand-name medication instead of switching to the generic. Look, and even the PBM wants this to happen because they get the large rebate payment off the $320 the PBM wouldn't make nearly as much money if the person was getting their $4 generic filled.

Okay? So, what does this mean? This means that the switch is selling their middleman position to the pharmaceutical company to front run you, the employer's plan design. Because remember, this is done automatically. The patient doesn't need to use a coupon. The patient doesn't need to sign up for any sort of voucher program. It happens automatically. So that when your plan member goes to the pharmacy, they think that you, the employer, have an insurance benefit where it only costs them $5, right? It looks totally seamless to them.

And I even asked the pharmacy about this when I went in a couple days ago. Believe it or not, our dog has epilepsy and I actually get our dog seizure medications at the grocery store pharmacy. I'm like, hey, pharmacy tech, do you know about these, like, these switchers like McKesson and Change Healthcare? He's like, oh yeah. And I'm like, and the coupon, it just happens automatically. So the person just has to pay like $5. And the pharmacy tech was like, oh yeah, it totally helps a lot. Of course it helps a lot for the patient.

But it totally screws over the plan. Alright. So pharmaceutical companies are front running your plan design. So you think you're in control of your plan design? Guess again. You got a switching company that's allowing a pharmaceutical company to essentially control your pharmaceutical plan design. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. A Healthcare Z..

