Title: Pharma _ Drug Company Strategies to Increase Cost__5JN9LN2bSE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5JN9LN2bSE
Language: en
Duration: 2:03
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and this is A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing pharmaceutical strategies to increase cost. So there are many strategies and we're only going to go over two of these many strategies today. But strategy number one is combination pills. This is where a pharmaceutical company will take two medications, oftentimes that are either already generic or even sometimes available over the counter and combine them into one prescription medication. For example, Duexis is a pain medication that is a combination of ibuprofen prescription strength, 800 milligrams and famotidine, which is the generic name for Pepsid, which you can also get over the counter.

Now it is, Duexis is $2,540 for a one month supply, whereas a one month supply of the ibuprofen is $8 and a one month supply of the famotidine is $12. So for $20 versus over $2,500, that's literally not 10 times, it's over a hundred times more expensive. And here you'd have to take the medication three times a day. And here you'd have to take the medication three times a day. So it's not changing the number of times a day, it's just changing the number of pills from two to one. Strategy number two, extended release.

So this is where minocycline extended release is used to treat acne. And that just means that it has a special coating on it that allows it to be released more slowly into the body. Okay, wonderful. One month supply, $725. The regular minocycline, which is already generic without the extended release, you have to take twice a day instead of once a day. And it's only $25 a month for twice as many pills for the 60 pills versus the 30 pills. They've actually done a study looking at the outcomes of the extended release versus the non-extended release.

And they actually found there was no difference between the two. And that was a study at Ohio State. I'll put the reference in the show notes. And so again, both of these strategies don't improve care or improve quality at all. But what they do do is they dramatically increase costs. And I wanted to share that with you today. And thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

