Title: Pharmacy Cost Interventions_ Strategies for Employers to Lower Medication Costs_K20K7qBBHRE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K20K7qBBHRE
Language: en
Duration: 2:32
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and this is A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be talking about pharmacy cost interventions. Now I'm not going to solve all of your pharmacy cost problems today, but I want to give you a framework for how to think about them. And that framework is to break down cost interventions into two categories, clinical and source. And so a clinical intervention is one where it's the same source of the medication, it's just a change in the medication. It's either a direct generic change or it is a therapeutic alternative change.

For example, a direct generic change would be like using Valsartan instead of Divan because Valsartan is the direct generic for Divan. And a therapeutic alternative change would be using a medication like Methotrexate instead of Humira for something like rheumatoid arthritis. So again, it's the same source of the medication, but you're literally changing the medication. Now there's a whole nother category of interventions that I call source interventions where you're not changing the medication at all. The medication stays the same.

That's why I wrote same clinical there. However, what happens is that the location or the source of the medication changes. And this especially applies to specialty medications that are infusions and oftentimes for employer plans, upwards of a third of their total pharmacy spend is actually within their medical claims. And upwards of half of their overall specialty pharmacy spend is actually in their medical claims for these infusion medications, oftentimes again for autoimmune diseases and cancer as well.

And so this is where the medication could be infused at the hospital, at the doctor's office, and sometimes even at home health. Now different medications have different requirements in terms of where they can be administered. But if it's administered at the hospital, well then by changing from one hospital to a different hospital, it could totally change the cost. And it could bring it down. Some infusions we've seen as high as 15 or 20, thousand dollars a month, we could bring it down to as low as two or three thousand dollars a month.

Likewise, some medications that are administered in the hospital could actually be administered in the doctor's office because they're very safe and easy to administer. Additionally, there are some medications, oftentimes in the case of let's say antibiotics for long-term treatment for infections, where the person can actually have those antibiotics infused at home. Now different medications apply in different situations, so we're not here to answer all that today. But the point is, is that when you're looking at pharmacy cost interventions, it's helpful to break them down into two categories of clinical and source.

And thank you for watching a healthcare to see. Thank you for watching a healthcare to see..

