Title: Physician Practice Managers Robbing Doctors_bWLGSzA4CQk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bWLGSzA4CQk
Language: en
Duration: 3:29
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is practice managers robbing doctors blind. Okay, I cannot believe that after over a year and a half here on a healthcare finance video, I have not talked about this subject because it is so incredibly common. It's like we got to talk about this. Okay, so physician practices have some of the highest rates of monetary financial mishandling of services businesses. Now, this is according to a medical economics article. I will leave a link to it in the show notes.

Now, believe it or not, three out of four doctors will experience some sort of financial mishandling of their practices money over the course of their career. Three quarters of them, 75%, it's unreal. So it's not a question of if it's going to happen. It's just a question of when for the most part. Now, 66% of the time, the offending person within the practice is the practice manager. It's the person in charge of the practice, the head administrator. Okay, what are they doing? They're stealing petty cash. They are in charge of payroll and they're either giving themselves bonuses or raises that have not been approved by the physicians.

They are using the credit, the company or the practice credit card for personal expenses. There is a laundry, they're writing themselves their own checks. There's a laundry list of things in this article that I will leave a link in the show notes that they do to steal money from the practice. Now, I personally have been sort of closely aware of two particular instances. One was a cardiologist in Illinois where his practice manager was stealing for him for 15 years before he found out about it. It had been going on for a decade and a half.

Okay, and another group of cardiologists, I think it's just a coincidence, I don't think cardiologists are particularly prone to this, right? For a cardiology group in Texas where their practice manager was doing the credit card thing. They were using the credit card to pay their utility bills. And not only that, but when that practice manager was going to leave and a new practice manager was hired, practice manager number one taught practice manager number two how to do this, how to steal from the practice.

I mean, it's ridiculous, right? And this group, they even had an outside like part-time CFO looking over their books and they still didn't catch it. Like, it's unreal. Okay, so the point here is that, look, the office manager works for the doctors. Therefore, when they engage in these behaviors of taking money, it's embezzlement. It's fraud. It's the wrong thing to do. However, let me ask you another question. We all know that more and more physicians now don't work for themselves. They work for a large organization.

And so, in effect, the doctors now work for the managers. So the question then becomes, okay, well, if the doctors work for the managers, to what extent are these things now okay to do, right? Especially the payroll for raises and bonuses, right? That's not okay if the manager works for the doctors. But if the doctors work for the manager, what's to stop that from happening? And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

