Title: Poverty in Healthcare_ 25 Year Lower Life Expectancy_ 22_ Higher Hospitalization Rate_2QbD_zXYJPk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zXYJPk
Language: en
Duration: 8:53
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is the impact of poverty in healthcare. So here on A Health Care Z, we talk about finance issues in healthcare. And if we're going to talk about healthcare finance, then we have to talk about poverty because it has a huge impact on people's health and people's healthcare. Now let's just talk about the definition of poverty, right? So the federal poverty level here in America is for an income of less than $12,760 for an individual and a family income of less than $26,200 for a family of four.

Now certainly there are a lot of low income families that receive food stamps and Medicaid and all sorts of other things that have like between 130 and 150% of the federal poverty level. And of these numbers, it's still considered low income and in requiring of assistance in a lot of situations. Okay. Now, specifically as it relates to health, there is a decreased life expectancy for those who are poor. It's huge. They did a study where Robert Wood Johnson found that if you lived in a poor neighborhood in New Orleans, your life expectancy was 25 years lower than if you lived in a non-poor neighborhood.

Likewise, in Kansas City, if you lived in a poor neighborhood, you had a 14-year lower life expectancy compared to if you lived in a non-poor neighborhood. So like, literally decades off of your life if you live in poverty. Okay. It increases your use of health care services. If you live in poverty, you have a 22% higher rate of hospitalization compared to people who are not in poverty. So, let's take a look at what are some things that we need to understand about those who live in poverty. One, they have a lower level of education.

Their educational attainment is lower. Of the poor, which 10% of the US population is poor, okay, so we're talking 1 in 10 Americans here, alright? So, 35% of the poor have a high school diploma. 28% of the poor don't even have a high school diploma. So you add that together, that's 63% either don't have a diploma or have just a high school diploma. So, 37% have greater than a high school diploma. So you can have some college or full college degree, etc. Okay. So, a lot of them work, okay? So, there is the working poor.

In fact, 3 million US adults, which is about 2.5% of the workforce, has a full-time job. Like, they work. It's not even part-time. 3 million Americans have a full-time job. And like, and a lot of the times, like, they're getting, like, major medical through that full-time employment. Okay. They work, they tend to work in certain industries, okay? They tend to work in, these working poor tend, who don't have a high school degree or have only a high school degree, tend to work in industries such as construction, maintenance and repair, transportation, and then caretakers, both typically of children and of the elderly.

So, there are a lot of people on employer-sponsored health plans who are poor. And it's important for employers in all industries, but especially these industries, to understand their plan members and the poverty that they live in. Okay. They have low levels of literacy. In fact, 54% of all Americans, of all US adults, have less than a 6th grade reading level. So, you always hear, okay, well you gotta have, like, you know, the average reading level in America is 8th grade. You gotta have all your literature stuff done to an 8th grade reading level.

Shoot! If you have stuff in an 8th grade reading level, you're cutting out 54% of Americans, because they can't read in 8th grade level, okay? For prescriptions, 46% of all US adults cannot read their prescription labels. What does that mean? That means almost half. That basically means that whenever, anybody on your plan, or if you're a pharmacist and you're prescribing something, or you're a doctor and you're prescribing something, like, there's basically a 50-50 chance that the person you're giving that medication to cannot read the label, okay? So, it should almost be assumed that they can't read the label until proven otherwise, because there's a 50-50 chance that they just can't read it at all, okay? So, obviously, it has huge implications for being able to take the medication correctly.

Okay. They, people who live in poverty have different ability, have a lower ability to have transportation. They just can't move around as easily. So, a quarter of people who live in poverty don't have a car, okay? In terms of the distance, the radius that they're able to travel, they did some studies of this too. In Atlanta, if you're not poor, you typically have a radius that you're able to travel of 29 miles, and if you're poor, the radius that you're able to travel is only 15 miles. In Los Angeles, if you're not poor, your radius of travel is typically 23 miles, but if you're poor, your radius is only 11 miles.

So, just being able to access, whether it be the grocery store or doctor's offices or other medical services, lab imaging, whatever, right? You just can't get around. So, now, of course, there is an impact of, like, racism in poverty as well. And it's a hugely complicated topic, and it is, frankly, just beyond the scope of this video today. But here are some of the characteristics of people who live in poverty and how it impacts their health. Now, what can employers and physician practices and hospitals, like, what can they do about this? So, that's fine.

Like, we absolutely need to take into account the poor people who are sick because they're more sick and they die younger. And, like, we don't just sit here and, like, twiddle our thumbs and say, oh, that's too bad. No! Like, we have the ability to do something, and what can we do? Okay, what are some solutions? One, when you're doing navigation, when you're helping people navigate their health insurance and their health care and their doctor's appointments, etc., etc., etc., Like, it, frankly, it needs to be by phone.

You need to talk to them. Because the written word, like, is probably not a good way of communicating, right? You gotta talk to them. And so that's fine. So, a lot of the navigation needs to be done over the phone. But then, obviously, who sees these people in person is, like, their doctor themselves. But if you work in employee benefits, I mean, at the place of work, I mean, at your place of work, you see. People in person at your place of work. So, I would add the primary care doctor and then your place of work in person.

So, this is done through, like, verbal communication and auditory listening, okay? That's how you can assess the risk for this in terms of, like, their education and their understanding and their literacy and their ability to travel. At Compass, at our healthcare navigation company, we experience this all the time. It's like, I don't have a car. Like, my doctor's appointment needs to be, like, along this subway line. Because, like, that's the easiest thing for me to do. And it's like, okay, we'll work within that parameter.

Because you told us that. And that's super helpful. I had a patient once, I probably told you this story, who, he was my patient for two and a half years. And then he had to leave an appointment early one time. I said, Mr. J, why do you have to leave early? He's like, I gotta go to school. I'm like, go to school? He's like, yeah, I can't read. I'm like, oh my goodness. I am an idiot. I have been seeing this patient for two and a half years. And I had no clue that he couldn't read. I was giving him patient flyers. And he was smiling and taking the patient flyers.

I was a complete moron. Okay? So, listen. If we're gonna understand healthcare finance, then we have to understand the impact of poverty in healthcare. And then do something about it. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

