Title: Primary Care Comparisons_ US vs Industrialized Countries_mTY2pMQoO7s
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mTY2pMQoO7s
Language: en
Duration: 10:34
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is international primary care. Or as I like to say, it can be different here in America. Primary care in America does not have to be this way. And of course there's been gazillions of international comparisons of the US healthcare system to the healthcare systems of other industrialized countries. But there was a most recent one from the Commonwealth Fund that just came out here in March of 2022. And it had a lot of great statistics in it that I wanted to share with you today.

And of course I will leave a link in the show notes to the actual study itself so you can read it if you like. So they did a survey both of people in a variety of industrialized countries and they did a survey of physicians in those countries. Specifically primary care physicians in those countries as well. And here's what they found. In regards to people who had a long-term relationship with a primary care physician. And they defined a long-term relationship as greater than five years. In the United States only 43% of the surveyed adults had a five-year or greater relationship with a primary care physician.

It was the lowest of all the countries they surveyed. Whereas in Germany it was 71%. So it was a little less than twice as much. So in America just know that like the degree of continuity and long-term relationships that we have with our primary care doctors, it's super low. It's abnormally low. So it doesn't have to be that way. Like other countries have figured out how to have a lot more continuity between their doctor and the patient. And guess what? Continuity is important. Knowing the patient is important. Having the patient know and trust the doctor is important for their health.

Okay, next up. They looked at primary care physicians who made house calls. Okay, so in America, only 37% of the surveyed primary care physicians said they made house calls. It was the lowest of all the industrialized countries that they surveyed. Now, the highest was in the UK where it was 97%. Holy moly. From like a third of American primary care doctors to almost a hundred percent of British primary care doctors. Like, Okay, listen, I did house calls myself in both medical school and residency as part of primary care rotations.

Like, it was awesome. It was so helpful. Like, I don't think that the US does very few house calls because, well, in America, we just don't need house calls. So that's why we don't do that. But in the UK, man, do they need house calls? Because they got problems, I don't know, in their houses. No, of course not. No, of course not. That's not the reason. Let me tell you something. The reason why US doctors don't make house calls is because they don't want to. Because the way they get paid does not in any way incentivize them to make house calls.

Okay, it's not like patients like don't come into my house, don't come into my house. No, listen, every time I made a house call in both medical school and residency, like, the person was hugely thankful that we had come and done that. Now, why that was, is a subject for another day? A lot of times because they had a hard time getting around. Like, if you're sick, it's hard to get around. They really enjoyed not having to go anywhere. Okay, next up. Access to primary care during off hours. Guess what? You don't just have medical issues Monday through Friday, nine to five.

You have them at night, you have them on weekends, you have them on holidays. Okay, let's look there. In the United States, only 45% of the surveyed patients had access to their primary care practices after hours. It was the lowest of all the industrialized countries they surveyed. In Germany, it's 96%. Again, almost 100% of people surveyed in Germany were like, oh yeah, I can totally contact my primary care practice after hours. In America, it was less than half. It doesn't have, again, do people in America like, oh, well, I just don't need access to my primary care doctor after hours? No, of course not.

They want access to their primary care practice after hours when they have issues at night and on weekends and on holidays. It's, again, I'm not trying to be harsh, American primary care physicians don't want to provide access after those hours. It's a pain to provide access after those hours. And they don't really get paid to provide that access after hours. So they don't do it 55% of the time. Now, let's talk about mental health in primary care. In the United States, the surveyed practices, only a third of them, 33%, offered some type of mental health counselors, psychiatrists, psychologists, therapists, etc.

that was incorporated and integrated into their primary care practices, a third. In the Swedens and Netherlands, it was 94%, again, pushing 100%, right? And as I've talked about on this channel before, like I was taught in medical school about the biopsychosocial model of disease, which means that you're just not cells that get infected by a bacteria or a virus. You're not just like a cholesterol plaque that's clogging up your arteries. That literally, the way you think and your behavior has a tremendous impact on your health.

So that's the psycho part of the biopsychosocial model. That your social situation, your family, your job, your community, the house that you live in, is a huge determinant in your disease and your health. Okay, the biopsychosocial model of disease. Okay, in only a third of primary care practices in America, do they even address the psycho part? They just address the bio part, okay? That's not the case at all in Sweden. It doesn't have to be that way, right? Again, it's not like people are saying, oh, you know, I don't need any sort of mental health or psychological help when I go to my primary care physician.

No, that's not what they're saying at all, because it's hard work to, like, provide those services in the primary care practice. So primary care practices in America don't do it, because they're not paid to do it. Now, what am I saying here in this report? Look, in America, we've got bad continuity of care. In America, we don't have people sticking with their docs for five years or more. In America, we've got bad access to care. We've got nobody making, very few people making house calls, and you have a hard time getting access to primary care docs after hours.

In America, we really have bad mental health integration into our primary care. Okay, like, newsflash. That's not a newsflash. I feel like everybody in America, like, kind of knows that already. And I'm not browbeaten primary care doctors in America. I'm just saying it doesn't have to be this way. Like, this is not, this is not the norm. You know, it's like living in some sort of, like, part of the country where you're like, well, you know, let's say you live in Minnesota. That's cold. It's really cold. Like, and then you go to Florida, like, okay, it doesn't have to be cold.

It doesn't, it's not required to be cold. It's not required to be this way. Okay? So, the point is, is that the article, the study from the Commonwealth Fund doesn't just say, okay, here's a whole bunch of problems. Go figure it out. No, they make suggestions. What, then there's a number of suggestions. What do the majority of the suggestions actually say? They say, change the way you pay primary care doctors. They say, change the money. Isn't that a shocker, right? That's why we're talking about this here. Hey, healthcare's easy.

Healthcare finance video channel. So, look at that. Their solution for changing the care, for changing the access to improving things is to change the money. They didn't say, well, we just need to have more professionals. We need to have more training. We need, no. They said, we've got to change the money. Aha. Who's got control of the money in America? Well, you, employers of America, you've got the money. Now, as John Toranis, CEO of Sarah Graff, of course, said, many people have heard this before, it's the golden rule, right? He who has the gold makes the rules.

You, the employers of America, have the gold. You can make the rules. It does not have to be this way. You can change the rules because you have the money. You're not going to change the entire U.S. healthcare system. You don't need to change the entire U.S. healthcare system. You can create your own mini Germany, UK, Sweden, Netherlands for your own company because you can change the way you pay doctors, specifically primary care doctors. How do you do that? Through on-site clinics, near-site clinics, direct primary care, and virtual primary care, where you directly pay the primary care doctors.

You do not pay the primary care doctors through a fee-for-service claim through an insurance carrier. So you've got to be like, look, I still got insurance for hospitalizations and ER visits and specialists, but I'm going to pay my primary care doctors directly. I'm going to change the way I pay them. And guess what? The Commonwealth Fund says that's the best way to do it. So just know that if you're doing an on-site or near-site clinic or direct primary care or virtual primary care, like that's in keeping with the Commonwealth Fund's international study here.

And that's what I wanted to share with you today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

