Title: Primary Care Threat to Hospitals_AWCXZZYGN14
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AWCXZZYGN14
Language: en
Duration: 8:21
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is primary care is a threat to hospitals. That's right. Now, in today's video, I'm going to be discussing how non-fee-for-service primary care is a threat to hospital systems. What do I mean by non-fee-for-service primary care? I specifically mean on-site clinics, near-site clinics for employer-sponsored health plans and direct primary care. And these are considered non-fee-for-service because on-site clinics and near-site clinics and direct primary care, they don't bill claims to an insurance company.

They're just paid a direct fixed fee by the employer, or in the case of direct primary care, it might be by the individual as well. So it's like a subscription. So it's not the fee-for-service model that encourages having super large patient panels and having super short visit times, but instead it prioritizes having smaller patient panels and having much longer visit times. And those longer visit times allow for much more effective primary care. Now, why is this a problem? Why is this a threat to hospital systems? Why are longer visits a threat to hospital systems? It's because employer-sponsored plans pay hospitals 254% of the Medicare rate.

In other words, employer-sponsored health plans are like the cash cow for hospital systems. So they need hospitalizations, they need ER visits, they need outpatient surgeries, they need endoscopies, they need all sorts of this stuff, healthcare services from employer-sponsored health plans to make all their money. Now, it turns out that when you have non-fee-for-service primary care, where you have these longer patient visits and these smaller patient panels and you coordinate care and you offer access to services off hours and on weekends and holidays, etc., etc., I've got multiple other videos on the models and the benefits of on-site clinics and near-site clinics and direct primary care.

I will leave a link to those in the show notes, but it turns out that this non-fee-for-service primary care lowers hospitalizations by 22% per year and it lowers ER visits by 11% per year. And these are specifically numbers from Intermountain Health's experience with their, because Intermountain Health actually runs a health insurance plan, so they collect premium. And so their own primary care providers are providing services for their members that are paying premium. They're not billing out claims for their own members.

Okay, so, and oh, by the way, ChenMed does the same thing. They have a subscription model for Medicare Advantage plan members. They don't charge fee-for-service. They decrease hospitalization and ER admits by 30 to 50%. So we'll just use the more conservative numbers here and just say that non-fee-for-service primary care decreases hospitalizations by 22% and ER visits by 11%. Okay, so then that begs the question, how much does primary care cost the hospital system? Because they're taking away all the commercially insured employer-sponsored health plan admits and ER visits.

Well, let's take a look at the numbers. So I apologize in advance. This is going to involve some math. So your typical patient panel for an on-site clinic, near-site clinic, direct primary care practice is about 800 patients. Now, I did a whole bunch of research. I'll leave the links in the show notes. But the typical hospitalization rate for someone under the age of 65 with employer-sponsored health insurance is about 5% per year. So about 5% per year of people under the age of 65 who have employer-sponsored health insurance are hospitalized.

And then the percentage of people in that same category who have an ER visit is 22%. So for like your typical primary care provider, and oh, by the way, that could be a physician or that could be a physician's assistant or it could be a nurse practitioner. There's a lot of successful practices that use what are referred to as APPs in addition to primary care doctors as well. Now, so if you take that patient panel of 800 times 5%, that is a total of 40 hospitalizations per year that you would expect across that patient panel.

And that's a total of 176 ER visits that you would expect across that patient panel as well. Well, if you decrease the hospitalizations by 22%, then you take the 0.22 times the 40 ER visits. And that means that non-fee-for-service primary care decreases hospitalizations by 9 hospital admits per year. And you do the same math for the ER visits, and it decreases ER visits by 19 ER visits per year. All right, now let's translate that in terms of dollars. So to find the amount of money that this is costing hospitals in terms of decreased hospitalizations, you take the 9 hospitalizations that are reduced by that one primary care provider, and then you multiply that by $27,932.

Because that's the average in-network allowed amount for a person with employer-sponsored health insurance for a hospital admission. On average, it's $27,932. Surgical admissions are more, labor and delivery tends to be less, but if you put it all in a wash, it's almost $28,000. And so you do the 9 times the almost $28,000, and that gets you $251,392 that are essentially taken away from hospital systems by one primary care provider. Next up, for the ER visits, you take those 19 ER visits times $2,453, which is the average in-network allowed amount for a person with employer-sponsored health insurance if you're under the age of 65.

So you take the 19 times the $2,453, and that gets you $46,607. Okay. So then you add the $251,000 plus the $46,000 for a total of $297,999 that is essentially taken away from hospital systems. Because these primary care physicians have prevented these hospitalizations and ER visits. So they've prevented revenue of almost $298,000 per primary care physician per year. So in other words, for every 10 primary care physicians, they are decreasing hospital revenue by like $3 million a year. So if you're a hospital system and you're like within a year, you see like 10 on-site, near-site practices, plus maybe it's two on-site clinics, two near-site clinics, and six direct primary care clinics or providers that open in a year.

Then those 10 doctors collectively have just decreased your revenue by about $3 million a year. And again, this is being super conservative here because the ChenMed numbers are even more impressive. And also, I'm not even including the fact that non-fee-for-service primary care decreases imaging. It decreases outpatient surgery. It decreases outpatient procedures like colonoscopies and upper endoscopies and infusions. And remember, the majority of hospital revenue is actually on the outpatient basis. The majority of hospital revenue is not even coming from inpatients and ER visits.

It's mostly coming from this stuff that I'm not even counting. So it's very reasonable that the amount of decreased revenue that one primary care provider is causing to a hospital system could be like double or triple this amount. I mean, it could be like upwards of $900,000 per primary care provider per year that they're taken away from hospital revenue. This is not a surprise to any hospital CEO, CFO, chief strategy officer, chief marketing officer. So just know that when hospital systems think about like competition and threats, you better believe that non-fee-for-service primary care physicians are an absolute threat to hospital systems.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Thank you..

