Title: Primary Care Innovation at Scale_gC9F5TujhY4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gC9F5TujhY4
Language: en
Duration: 16:10
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is reimagined primary care at scale. Now this video is based upon a presentation by the CEO of Chen Med, Dr. Chris Chen, on June 8th of 2022 to the Department of Health and Human Services. And in fact he posted this video himself and it's available on YouTube. I will leave a link to it in the show notes. But in this video Dr. Chen essentially lays out the entire Chen Med strategy for how they have been successful in implementing for literally decades now full risk primary care.

And his presentation specifically starts at minute 14 and 50 seconds. So I encourage every single one of you who watches this video today, go and watch it straight from the source from Dr. Chris Chen. Now what I will tell you today has a lot of points. This let me be like a record for the number of points I've put here on A Health Care Z. But he literally lays out the entire strategy for how you can have an effective patient-centered medical home to increase quality, decrease costs, and make the docs and the other health care providers extremely happy.

Like this accomplishes the triple aim, quadruple aim, quintuple aim, whatever aim you want to talk about. Like they're literally doing it. They are knocking it out of the park. And Dr. Chen does something very generous and lays it all out there. He explains exactly how they do it. And I'm going to share that with you right now. So Chen Med has 130 primary care centers across the country. They are in 40 cities in places like Miami and Detroit and Houston. They are across 14 states and they themselves have about 5,000 employees.

So this isn't, I mean it's a physician practice. It's a physician practice. It's a physician practice that happens to have 5,000 employees and have 130 locations and be in 40 cities in 14 states. What's that called? One of the largest primary care practices in America. Now they take on full capitated risk from Medicare Advantage plans. For each individual beneficiary, the Medicare Advantage plan gives them an amount of money and Chen Med is wholly responsible for the primary care, the specialty care, the hospitalizations, the surgical costs, the medication costs, the durable medical equipment costs.

All of the costs are capitated and the Chen Med physician and teams are accountable for all of that spend. Full capitated. None of this like one-sided risk, yada yada. It is full capitation. And they're doing this for economically disadvantaged people. 40% of their patients are dual eligible, which means they're eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid, which means they have incredibly low income. So they're doing this for the poor elderly and 70% of their patients are minorities. They're doing this for poor minority patients.

And oh by the way, 70% of the Chen Med employees themselves, coincidentally, are also minorities. And we'll get into why it's so important to have your employee population that is serving the patients be similar to any patient population. We'll get to that when we talk about trust. Okay. Now, he says one of the central things that Chen Med has to do, which nobody else does, is they essentially have to retrain the primary care physicians. They get them out of residency and they say to the primary care physicians, you're not done with your training.

Like essentially, you're part of the way there, but you're not done. And you're essentially going to get a nine to 12 month fellowship with Chen Med so that we can actually teach you what you need to know to be an effective primary care physician. Because frankly, what you learn in residency is inadequate. And here's what they teach. One, they teach them how to lead. Newsflash. The majority of doctors don't know how to lead teams. When I was in medical school and residency, I received zero training on how to lead.

Zero. And I went to one of the best residency programs in the country. Okay. Two, how to influence patients. Because behavior change is key to effective care. How much, like, formal instruction do primary care physicians receive on behavior modifications? Very little. Customer service. Like, you've got to be nice to people. Chen Med has to specifically train its doctors on how to be nice to people. Okay. I'm teaching the economics of healthcare and of medicine. Again, how much training did I get about the economics of healthcare and medicine in residency and medical school? Zero.

They have to teach it to them. If you're going to be a doctor, you have to know how the money works because it dramatically influences the care of the patients. If they can't afford the medications, they're not going to take them. And they're going to get worse. You have to understand how money influences care. They teach it to them explicitly. Next up. Documentation for care, not for billing. Documentation for care, not for billing. So much of documentation is meant to fulfill the requirements of E&M codes for reimbursement.

That's evaluation and management codes for reimbursement. But it's not done to be like effectively communicate the history and the status of the patients so that other clinicians can know what's going on with the patient. They have to teach them how to share medical information in the documentation about the patients. Look at that. I'm not trying to be overly harsh. But the fact that ChenMed has to do this is an indication that what is necessary to be an effective primary care physician is not adequately taught in medical school and residency.

Okay. I'm not here to incriminate the system. I'm not here to boil the ocean. Neither is ChenMed. They're just saying, look, you need more training. This is what you're going to need training on. So that's what we're going to do. Next up. They do this around three specific areas. So one, around behavior modification and social determinants of health. Right? Because they said, look, only 20% of health is determined by pills, procedures, and referrals. Historically, that's what primary care physicians do. They do pills, procedures, and they do referrals.

Like, that's kind of, and like 80% of primary care is not that. It's about the behavior of the patient. It's about the community and their housing situation, et cetera, et cetera, that they're in. It's, he calls it prevention, but what he, in my opinion, what he really means is being proactive. So not prevention around like, you know, mammograms and colonoscopies and flu shots, et cetera, et cetera. It's, okay, you've got diabetes. How can we proactively address your condition to keep you healthy? You've got congestive heart failure.

How can we proactively treat your condition to keep you healthy? So treating diabetes and treating CHF would never be quote unquote considered prevention because you have a diagnosis, right? But you can proactively address those disease is so that they can get better and not just be reactive for when they get worse. Hospitalization, yada, yada, yada. Okay. Now, in a specific area of measurement and accountability. So this is where we get into how the individual primary care physicians at Chen Med are held accountable for the outcomes for their patients.

Fee for service doesn't do that. Fee for service says, well, you just kind of show up and your patients show up and you kind of do something. It may be good. It may not be good. But if they show up and you show up, then you get the bill for it and you get paid. And Chen Med says, no, you, the primary care doctor are being held accountable for your patients outcomes. Now, they do that through a variety of things. I call this segment of the presentation, the T's because they all start with the letter T. Now, they do this through tech.

What do I mean by that? They created their own electronic medical record system. And this is hugely important. It should not even be called the electronic medical record system because it's not, the fact that it quote unquote keeps records is only a minor part of what it actually functions as. What the EMR does is it actually controls the clinical workflow. And the point is, is that they have designed clinical workflows that effectively drive the outcomes into their EMR. That is hugely important. It should not even be called an electronic medical record.

Like it is essentially, it's essentially like, it's like the ERP. It's like the CRM for patient care. It's not just a record keeping system. And Chen Med knows that that is so important that they can't vendor that out to somebody who doesn't know the effective way to treat patients in a primary care setting. So they built it themselves. They've got the workflows ingrained in it themselves. Hugely important. Next up, they analyze the data with almost 400 data scientists. Okay, they have 5,000 employees, they have 400, that means that almost 10% of their employees are data scientists.

If you go to a hospital, are 10% of hospital employees data scientists? If you go to another primary care practice or a specialty practice, are 10% of their employees data scientists? Probably not. So it shows you have to have a lot of people doing the analytics around. Why do we do this? Because science is the mother of medicine. Data is the mother of medicine. Opinions don't matter, right? We used to have the opinion that leeches were effective. We used to have the opinion that bloodletting was a good idea.

We had the opinion that lying perfectly still in a hospital bed after a heart attack was a good idea back in the 1960s. All those things hastened death. Opinions don't matter. Data does. And that's why they've put so much emphasis around the data. Like I said, data, science is the mother of medicine. That's how it works. That's why they emphasize it so much. Okay, next up. Trust. You can accomplish nothing in patient care and behavior modification unless there is trust between the patient and the physician. There is a specific methodology that they use to establish trust with patients.

One. Small patient panel size. One physician for every 400 patients. Typically, in your typical primary care setting, it's one physician for every like 3,000 patients. The point is the docs spread too thin. You can't get 3,000 people to trust you. I can't get 3,000 people to trust me. Nobody can get 3,000 people to trust them. But you can form a relationship with 400 people and you can get 400 people to trust you. Okay. They have a minimum of monthly visits with those patients. So it's not like, okay, hey, I'll see you once a year.

No. It's not like, hey, I'll just see you when you have a complaint or when you have a cold. Like, they see their patients a minimum of once a month. They give their patients their cell phone so they have direct access to the physician anytime. And guess what? The patients don't abuse it. Guess what? That establishes trust. I once worked with a gynecologic oncologist outside of the city of Chicago. He gave his patients his cell phone number because they had cancer and they were scared to death. Literally, they were incredibly fearful.

When he gave them his cell phone number, you should have seen what it did to their faces. I mean, it was unreal because they were so scared and they knew that within a moment's notice, they could talk to their doctor. Hugely important. Okay. Next up. Next thing is the team. Okay. If not just the doc. The doc leads the team. The doctor is accountable and leads the team of nurses, case managers, care coordinators, care, care, care, care, care, care. On-site pharmacy, ChenMed dispenses 90% of the medications to their patients at the clinic.

In a previous A Healthcare Z video, I said that less than 50% of prescriptions that are written get filled. So we hear they're like, look, you don't even have to worry about that because we're going to fill it right here and we're going to give it to you in a bag. Look at that. That is hugely important for compliance is they actually fill the medications on site and they give it to the patients. Okay, lab on site. Classes, Tai Chi, Zumba, cooking classes, they celebrate everyone's birthdays monthly. So in the month of July, you come and you have a birthday night because loneliness is fatal.

They do Tai Chi because it decreases falls and hip fractures are fatal. Look at this. It is the doctor that's leading this comprehensive team. Okay, the final take, transportation. Getting to the clinic is hard to do. They got a GenMed minivan that provides door-to-door service. They pick you up, they take you to the clinic, they take you back home. If you said to your typical Medicare beneficiary, hey, driving is kind of a pain. Traffic stinks. A lot of people who are older, they're not carried drivers. My grandfather used to take out mailboxes all the time, right? Hey, you don't have to drive.

Somebody will drive you. Shoot, there's a lot of people who would probably sign up for it just for that. Just so that they wouldn't have to drive to the doctor's office. Okay, now, we got to talk about pay because you have to align the physician compensation with the goals. And GenMed does that. They pay a base rate that is comparable to the market salary for the primary care physician. Plus, they pay them an additional 20% to 30% bonus based on outcomes. Now, on average, I'll leave a link in the show notes here.

On average, typical primary care physicians in America makes $260,000 base. So, in other words, GenMed pays $260,000. And then with a 30% bonus, they can make up to $340,000 a year. $340,000 a year is a lot of money. It is nothing to sneeze at. And guess what GenMed says? We have no problem recruiting primary care physicians. Of course they have no problem recruiting primary care physicians. Because you've got this awesome team. You only have to see 400 patients. And they pay you $340,000 a year. That sounds like a pretty good gig.

Okay, now, let's talk about results. Because all this is meaningless unless it has results. Now, hospitalizations and ER visits down 30% to 50%. CHF, congestive heart failure admissions, down 70%. The vast majority of CHF admissions are due to, like, medication non-adherence. Couldn't get it filled. Forgot to take it. Blah, blah, blah. And dietary indiscretion. That makes up the majority of it. I mean, listen. You just have to have a relationship. You've got to talk to them. You've got to problem solve with them. You've got to do reminders.

Blah, blah, blah. You've got to go to their house. You've got to check their pillboxes. Like, CHF admissions can absolutely be done. It's not rocket science. There's no sort of, like, scientific discovery that needs to happen to decrease CHF admissions. It just takes the systems and the structure and the people and the process and the tools that GenMed has in place. It's not rocket science. Okay. Strokes down. 22%. This is huge. Dr. Chen lays it all out for us to see. So the least we can do is learn about it. And that's my point for today.

Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

