Title: Private Equity Owning Doctor Practices... Corporate Practice of Medicine Laws Explained_2epmk4_-kUI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-kUI
Language: en
Duration: 8:07
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is private equity owning doctor practices. Now many of you have heard a lot about this in the news, so we need to go over this in detail. And it starts off with something that's frankly a little boring, and that is the corporate practice of medicine laws. What in the world are corporate practices of medicine laws? Okay, they are laws that say that doctors can't work for a corporation. Why in the world would we have laws that say that doctors can't work for corporations? Because we don't want doctors putting the interest of shareholders before their patients.

There might be a multitude of situations where the doctor could actually harm the patient if they put the shareholder first. Next up, you would not want the corporation interfering with the doctor's judgment at all. So these laws were put into place. And guess where they were put into place? They were put into place at the state level. Okay, so laws regarding corporations not being able to employ physicians are regulated at the state level, not at the federal level. Okay, what do they say? They say that look, there are exceptions to this.

And those exceptions are that a doctor can work for a company or a corporation if that corporation is owned by other practicing physicians in that state. Or that doctor can work for a corporation if that corporation is a hospital or a non-profit hospital. But because this is regulated at the state level, it's highly variable. So some states have very strict corporate practice of medicine laws that really allow for very little leniency around this. And other states have much more lenient corporate practice of medicine laws.

So it's highly inconsistent depending upon where you live. Now, what does this have to do with private equity firms? So private equity firms have been going on a physician practice buying binge. Okay, so there was a study done by some researchers at the University of Pennsylvania that found that private equity firms had bought 355 physician practices between 2013 and 2016. They tended to be in the areas of anesthesia, ER, radiology, and pathology. And one of the main financial reasons for that is that once the private equity firm bought one of those practices, they could then take the physicians out of network and then sock it to the insurance company and the patient with these much higher pills.

Now, why? Because with anesthesia, the patient almost never has a choice beforehand. With the ER doctor, it's an emergency. What are you going to do? You're going to be like, well, I'm bleeding. So I'm going to go to a different ER where it's not an out. I mean, you don't even know. And it's an emergency, right? Same thing with radiology and pathology. You never see these people. The patient never sees this person. They have no idea who's reading their film. I've made a previous video that I'll leave a note to in the show notes where we got billed like almost $10,000 just for the radiology reading fee.

I mean, it was ludicrous. It's like literally like 10 minutes of work and they were trying to bill me almost $10,000, right? Guess what? That's a great business model. If you're trying to make money, socking it to people when they're in an emergent situation or where it's unbeknownst to them who's actually providing care, that's a great way to make a lot of money. Okay. So some examples of really huge private equity physician deals are, many of you know this already, when KKR, the major private equity firm, bought Envision, which was sort of the largest of these physician practices, and they paid almost $10 billion to buy this practice.

Likewise, the massive private equity firm Blackstone bought the second largest physician practice, Team Health, again, filled with ER physicians and anesthesiologists and radiologists, etc. That has 20,000 physicians and other clinicians like physicians assistants, nurse practitioners, and they bought that for $6 billion. So it's a lot of deals and these deals were fairly sizable amounts. I mean, $10 billion, $6 billion. I mean, these are significant amounts of money. These are a lot of physicians and these are having serious ramifications for patients and employers.

Now, the question becomes then, okay, how in the world can a private equity firm own a physician practice of doctors when you have these corporate practice of medicine laws? Don't all the state laws say that a private equity firm can't own a physician practice? Like, how is this legal? Aha! I will explain how. So the private equity firm sets up a shell company that they call a management company, and they give the money to that management company, and then that management company then purchases the assets of the practice.

And those assets would be like if they've got any cash in the bank, those assets could be their contracts, those assets could be all their equipment, those assets could be their leases, those assets could be, sometimes they'll even employ all of the non-clinical employees at the practice. And then the management company then signs a service agreement with the physicians themselves. Now, so the physicians essentially are independent and they just have a service agreement with this practice. Now, the physicians get a chunk of change, right, because they owned the practice, so they get this huge lump sum amount, and then oftentimes the physicians afterwards actually make about 30% less than they used to, because obviously the private equity firm and the management company, they want to skim as much as they can off the top.

And sometimes it's called a management fee, sometimes it's 10%, sometimes it's 40%, but you get the point. The point is that they decrease the physician's reimbursement as a way to cut in cost, and then they take them out of network as a way to increase revenue, and then they skim off the difference. I shouldn't say skim off the difference, they cream off the difference. Okay, now, in some states where they have stricter corporate practice and medicine laws, it has to get a little bit more complicated, where the private equity firm still sets up the management company, and the management company still buys the assets of the practice.

However, the management company, because of the state law, is not allowed to enter into this service agreement with the physicians because it's too close to an employment agreement. So what they have to do is the private equity firm actually has to set up a new practice that is, quote unquote, owned by a friendly physician or a captive physician. So that that physician, whether it's one person or multiple people, that one physician then employs the physicians at the practice. And that is how they are still able to legally structure the deal such that it is within the letter of the law of the corporate practice of medicine law.

Okay. However, regardless of the structure, the spirit of the corporate practice of medicine law is that the doctor should not be taking orders from a profit driven company that has a, I mean, the private equity firm has a fiduciary responsibility to its, you know, you invest in a fund, and they have fiduciary responsibility to those investors into that fund to maximize their return. So the loyalty of the private equity firm is not to the patients. Like the loyalty of the private equity firm is to their limited partners.

It's to their investors. So the spirit of the corporate practice of medicine laws is essentially being totally thrown out the window. The spirit of the law is being totally thrown out the window with impunity. And this is happening all over America. And apparently this is just okay. And that's what I wanted to talk about today. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

