Title: Quest Diagnostics Employee Healthcare Case Study_4m6-UrSX7I8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4m6-UrSX7I8
Language: en
Duration: 5:55
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing a case study of the Quest Diagnostics Employee Health Plan. Now many of you are familiar with Quest Diagnostics because you as an employer or as a health plan, your employees and your health plan members, they get a lot of their labs drawn at Quest. Well this is for the employees at Quest themselves in their own health care. So, just an overview of their plan. They have 60,000 lives on their plan. They are in 49 states.

They have 23 sites that have between 400 and 2,000 employees. In other words, higher concentrations of employees. But obviously if they're in 49 states and they only have 23 of these, then they've got a whole bunch of other locations where the employees are just more spread out. Okay, so what? They've got a lot of plan members and they're all over the place. Okay, mean age, 35 years, just a little bit higher than the average. 57% female, again a little bit higher than the average. And they did have longer tenure.

So, on average their tenure is greater than 8 years. So, they don't have as high a turnover as most other companies. Okay. Now, they had a problem. In 2015, their health plan was way over budget. And so, they did what I will call the kitchen sink. They made a ton of changes. Many of them awesome. They put in a consumer-directed health plan with a health reimbursement arrangement. They put in centers of excellence with incentives to steer people to that. They put in a narrow network with incentives for people to choose that narrow network.

They put changes in their medication formula. Decreasing the number of brand options that they had and putting in incentives to increase the choice for generics when that was an option compared to brand. They added a spousal surcharge when the spouse had an option to get insurance through their own employer instead of the Quest insurance. They took some of their COBRA eligible former terminated employees and they put them on an exchange where they subsidized the premium. But they took them off their plan and put them on an exchange.

They had a mandatory secondary second opinion program for certain services such as spine surgery which has a high degree of variability between physicians. Okay. And then they put in a incentive program specifically for specialty meds where they incentivized the employees to have their specialty meds like infused at a lower cost location. So, they did a ton of stuff. Guess what else they did? And this is like a huge culture change. They took the administration of the plan out of HR and they gave it to a chief medical officer and a staff within their company.

Whoa. That's pretty drastic. I'm not saying that every company should do this or needs to do this. I am in no way saying that a chief medical officer is the end all be all of healthcare solutions. But I'm just saying that's what they did. That's kind of a big deal. Okay. They also specifically as a company they looked at their claims in detail as it relates related to fraud. They did manual review of their claims related to fraud. In terms of waste where the employer identified waste in the plan and alerted Aetna, their ASO carrier to it.

And then abuse again where the employer was examining the claims to identify these things. Note here. The employer, not the carrier. The employer was identifying fraud, waste, and abuse. Oh, what else did they do? For utilization management, in other words, the clinical intervention of the nurses and the physicians at Aetna for high risk or complicated members, they did proactive meetings between the plan and Aetna bi-weekly. They met every two weeks. I mean, eventually they stretched it out to monthly, but they were meeting every two weeks.

And what did they find as a result of meeting so frequently? They drastically improved execution. So it wasn't like the plan for utilization management. It wasn't the strategy for utilization management. It was the execution of utilization management that was dramatically improved as a result of meeting a lot. So in other words, what does that mean? It means that this new arrangement, it kept a really short leash on the claims and the employer was watching them like a hawk. And they kept a very short leash on their ASO carrier Aetna.

Isn't that interesting? Now, here's the punchline. What were the results? Okay, in 2015, when they were going over budget, they were trending at 5.7%. Subsequent years at 4.6%. Year after that, it was at negative 1%. Year after that, it was 0.3%. So they went from trending up at upwards of 6% to going negative to flat. Wow! That's pretty impressive. Like, hats off to them. That's awesome. They posted this in an article. I'll leave a link to it in the show notes. It is a fantastic article. I encourage you to read it. Now, what did they not do? They did not do any on-site, near-site clinics.

Of course they didn't. They've got 60,000 people in 49 states all over the place. Like, it's not necessarily realistic for an employer like this to have an on-site, near-site clinic strategy, unlike manufacturing, municipality, etc. Okay, great. So my point is, there's more than one way to skin a cat. And in terms of lowering health care costs, they didn't do reference-based pricing. They didn't do on-site, near-site clinic. What they did do was this sort of kitchen sink approach, culture change, and then very short leash on their claims and their carrier.

And they had fantastic results. So I wanted to share that with you today. And thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

