Title: Richard T. Burke the Co-Founder of United Healthcare and UnitedHealth Group_GWYMIsBnU_4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4
Language: en
Duration: 3:11
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing Richard T. Burke, the founder of United Health Group. Now, if we look here at the largest corporations in America, many people can actually just rattle off the founders of those companies off the top of their head. So, for example, Warren Warren, Sam Walton, Exxon, John D. Rockefeller, Apple, Steve Jobs and C. Wozniak, Berkshire Hathaway, Warren Buffett, Amazon, Jeff Bezos. And then you get to the next largest company in America, which is United Health Group.

And I think most people would be like, because most people probably don't know who the founder of United Health Group is. And that's kind of odd. How can such a large and powerful company not have any sort of profile or a lot of extensive information about its founders? Okay, well, it was founded by Richard Burke and then also Dr. Paul Elwood in 1977. Now, if you go on the internet, you can find tons of information about Dr. Paul Elwood, but not so much about Richard Burke. Okay, he's only mentioned once in United Health Group's own history.

And even then, they just refer to him as an entrepreneur. And that's it. Now, he was, so you might say, okay, well, maybe he was just involved with UHG at the beginning, and then he went away. But that's not the case. So, he was board chairman from 1977 until 98. He remained on the board, but was no longer chairman for a period of time. And then he came back when there was a stock backdating scandal in 2006. And then he just stepped down as chairman of the board in 2017. And he's still on the board today, even though he's not chairman.

So, he's like thoroughly involved. And he's been thoroughly involved since the beginning. And he's thoroughly involved now. He's in his 70s. Okay. Now, he was also on the board of Meritage Homes, publicly traded company, right, until 2019. So, he literally just left the board there. The only picture that I could find of him on the internet was from this Meritage Homes press release when he stepped down from being on their board. He also was one of the owners of the Arizona Coyotes and helped move them from Winnipeg, where they were the Winnipeg Jets, to Arizona.

Okay, so there's a little bit more information about him. Now, there's no Wikipedia page about him. I find that kind of odd. There are very few to know articles about this person, about Richard T. Burke. Can you find articles about the founders of all these companies? Gobs and gobs and gobs of them, but not Richard T. Burke. Okay. Again, only one picture. So, why is this important? Who cares? It's because how did UHG become such a big and powerful company in healthcare? I mean, organizations are not nameless and faceless.

I mean, they are groups of people, and people are responsible for decisions that cause these organizations to be the way they are. Okay? Walmart, Exxon, Apple, Berkshire Hathaway, and Amazon would not be the companies they are today without their founders. Likewise, United Health Group would not be the company it is today without Richard T. Burke. So, I think it's important for all of us to know who this gentleman is. And, this is where I need your help. I'm not the world's best investigator, so maybe all of you know more about him than I do.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

