Title: Roadmap to High Performance Employee Health Plan_l0rLUIqNs1U
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l0rLUIqNs1U
Language: en
Duration: 12:58
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is a roadmap to a high-performance employee health plan. That's right, today I am going to lay out the grand unifying strategy for how a high-performance health plan can be assembled, in my opinion. And if you stay to the end for the punchline, I will tell you that this is not in theory, that this has already been done, and it was done over 12 years ago. So, let's get into what this looks like. So, what we have here is a pyramid, where we have acute care, specialist care, and primary care here on the bottom.

So, the foundation of the high-performance employee health plan is primary care. No surprise, all of you know that. Now, it's not just primary care. It has two key components. First component is the location of the primary care. It has two locations. It has a virtual location, and it has an in-person location. So, the point is, is that in this day and age, really, the in-person visits and the virtual visits, they really need to be fluid, so that you can meet employees where they are, and you can meet a geographically dispersed employee population.

So, the primary care comes in the form of both virtual primary care and the form of an on-site, near-site clinic. Now, that's the first part of it. The second part of the primary care is that it is a patient-centered medical home. It is a third-generation patient-centered medical home. It is a third-generation patient-centered medical home, a la Brent James, Dr. Brent James from Intermountain, who has already created this and already proven that it works. And by third-generation, it means it has care management, most often with nurses for chronic diseases, such as your COPD and your diabetes.

It has mental health services, depression, anxiety, etc., whether it be through social workers or counselors, etc., psychologists, psychiatrists as well. Third piece, and then it has health system navigation. The health system itself is so complicated, which is what we did at Compass, that you actually need a person whose full-time job is just to navigate the person through the complexity of the health care system itself. Okay, so that is your primary care piece. Now, the way you pay for that primary care piece is not through your health insurance plan and, in other words, it's not through your TPA, it's not through claims, it's not through your ASO.

It's direct. You directly contract with these folks. Now, the other key to here is that the physicians and the nurses, all the providers here, because we're not doing claims, they're on salary. Because the A number one thing that makes this foundation of primary care work is love. And you've heard me say this before. And love is spelled T-I-M-E. In order to do appropriate primary care, it needs time. And when you put the practitioners on salary, they then take the time needed, the half hour, 45 minutes, hour-long visits, to do effective primary care.

Okay, so here's your foundation, primary care, which also allows you then to control the steerage and the referrals into the specialist care. So, obviously, primary care physicians are not going to be able to take care of everything. Of course, you're going to need cardiologists and gastroenterologists and ENTs and OBGYNs. They're wonderful doctors. Of course, we need them. We need them as the next layer on top of the foundation of primary care. Now, this is where the existing, or not the existing, just a TPA or ASO with a large national network.

Because, of course, you're not going to directly contract with all the different specialists out there. That's impossible. This is the traditional claims-based network relationship adjudication that you have today that you know very well. There's a major difference, though, and that is that there is plan design that allows for steerage to the highest quality specialist and away from the lowest quality specialist within that PPO network. There is steerage within the PPO network baked into the plan design such that the highest quality specialists have very low to even no out-of-pocket costs for the members, whereas the poor quality specialists have higher out-of-pocket costs for the members.

So, there is a direct financial incentive through the adjudication and the plan design to get the patients to the highest quality specialists. And then, finally, the top layer, because, of course, seeing the gastroenterologist or the cardiologist can't fix anything, of course you're going to need acute care hospitalizations. You're still going to need to have major surgeries, etc. Of course, horrible things happen that require orthopedic surgeries, like, you know, such horrible degenerative joint disease that you've got to have major spine surgery or you've got to have a knee replacement.

The, you know, horrible reality of cancer. You have primary care, you're specialist care, people are still going to get cancer. You have cardiovascular disease, people still needing coronary artery bypass grafts, etc., or aortic valve replacements. Here is going to be, again, it is a direct care sandwich. Here, you're going to have direct contracts through centers of excellence for orthopedic care, cancer, and cardiovascular care. Or centers of value, they may also be called as well. So, this doesn't necessarily have to run through your carrier either, right? So, you've got sort of a carrier sandwich, right, where you're going to have your TPA, ASO here in the middle, but you're going to have direct contracting here on the bottom for your primary care, and then you're going to have direct contracting for your acute care hospitalizations on top.

And, of course, not all hospitalizations, like, you know, your labor and delivery, because you can't do that with all the different OBGYNs all over America for deliveries. So, maybe your deliveries don't go through that way. But the point is that for these major diagnostic categories that are drivers of high-cost claims of ortho cancer and cardiovascular, you can do direct contracting. So, there's your pyramid. Now, what I did not put on here is this is all then surrounded by a transparent pass-through PBM.

I'll say that again. All of this is surrounded by a transparent pass-through PBM. And the great news is that there are more and more options to do that. Now, this all makes sense if you're self-funded. If you're fully insured, you can't do this. Your A number one step if you're fully insured is to go self-funded. And until you go self-funded, there's, like, not really much of a conversation for us to have. Essentially, if you have more than 150 to 200 employees, like, you should be self-funded. There are very few reasons why you would not want to be self-funded.

So, just, you know, for all those folks out there that are around 150 to 200 employees and you're fully insured, you need to give some serious thought. Because to a certain extent, it's almost like employee benefits malpractice to be fully insured and not self-funded. So, but if you already are self-funded, then this is what the roadmap looks like. Now, here's the punchline part. This has already been done. This is not some sort of Eric Bricker theory. This, as you already probably know, has already been built and accomplished and implemented over 12 years ago by John Touranus, the CEO of Serigraph, where he put in place this model.

And what he did required a $2 million upfront investment for his company of 1,000 employees based in Wisconsin. They make dashboards for cars and trucks that they are then a supplier to, like, GM and Ford, etc. Now, as a result of this, they were able to then save $31 million over the next nine years. Their health plan costs remain flat. And so, if you compare, after they put in that $2 million, they kept, and they put in this, they kept their health care costs flat for nine years. So, then, if you compare the difference between what their health care costs were versus the rise in the health care costs, and you add that up over the nine years, they saved $31 million, right? So, they didn't spend $2 million a year.

They spent $2 million extra once, and it yielded them $31 million. So, it was a 15 to 1 ROI. But, that for 1,000 employees, $2 million upfront is they had to make a $2,000 per employee upfront investment. So, just know that if you've got 500 employees or 2,000 employees or 10,000 employees, that for every 1,000 employees, if you're going to do what John Torrance did, you're going to need to spend $2,000 per employee to at least match, from a budgetary perspective, what he did. But, it yielded a 15 to 1 ROI.

Now, at the end of the nine years, and oh, by the way, he wrote all this in the book, The Company That Solved Health Care, which is copyrighted in 2010. This thing was published 12 years ago. And, to this day, the majority of the people that I talk to who work in employee benefits have still not read this book. It's like this thick. The print is really big. It's like super easy to get through. Now, his per member, per year, not per employee, per member, per year cost was $3,640, which is like half the national average.

It's like less than half the national average. Now, another Wisconsin employer, Quad Med, they really heavily focused on this bottom primary care piece, and they focused on it so much that they actually got their annual per member, per year cost down to $3,135 per member, per year. Even better than serigraph. So, the key to both the John Tornis serigraph story and the Quad Med story, and John Tornis says this himself in the book, is the key is, is that this roadmap was spearheaded by the CEO. I would argue for the, I don't know if there's an HR department in America that can go to their CFO and just be like, hey, I need $2,000 per employee just as an upfront investment for our benefits.

Like, I'm not sure that really, that's really an ask that any HR person could do. But, that is a budgetary allocation that the CEO could do. And, in fact, he or she probably would need to have a serious discussion at the board level in regard to that. So, same thing at Quad Med. It was the CEO of Quad Med that made this happen. So, really, the roadmap to a high-performance employee health plan really starts with the CEO. And, I would even argue that unless you have the CEO spearheading this, like, not just, like, on board, not just bought in, but unless you have the CEO spearheading this, I'm not sure you can do it.

In fact, one of the, sort of, grandfathers in the wellness space, this guy, D. Eddington, you may have heard of him, so he's out of Michigan. And, one of his rules for his wellness company is that he required a 30-minute one-on-one meeting with the CEO of a prospective client. Otherwise, he wouldn't, he wouldn't even want to work with them. Unless the CEO is willing to take the time to spend 30 minutes with me to talk about the health of the employees, well, then, well, they're not going to be a good fit.

And, guess what he found? The majority of CEOs would not spend 30 minutes with him to talk about it. So, I'm not saying that this is easy. It takes time. It takes money. It takes commitment. It takes the CEO. But, the point is, it can be done. It has been done. And, I make all these different videos, but I wanted to tie it together here so you could see what that roadmap would look like. And, that's my point for today. Thank you for watching. A Healthcare Z..

