Title: Scaling Primary Care_ Growing Customers and Clinical Staff_6KSTMrMTUUs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6KSTMrMTUUs
Language: en
Duration: 12:15
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is scaling primary care and how to do that with more customers and more inputs. So today's video is based upon a discussion I had with a group that's called X equals PC or X equals primary care where they're solving for X, where X is really innovation in primary care. Now this organization was founded by doctors Kenneth Q and Paulius Mui and Dr. Dave Nichols as part of them as well and they are three very young ambitious family practice physicians who are looking to dramatically improve primary care in America.

It's an incredibly laudable goal that they have. Now when they got this group of folks together to discuss scaling primary care it was a fantastic discussion and I learned a lot and I wanted to share with you a lot of what came up during that discussion. So obviously if you're scaling, in other words if you're growing primary care, then you have to have more patients, you have to have more customers, you have to have more people that you're treating. So we discussed how do you go about doing that. And so what was really interesting was that primary care is in a variety of settings and so the ways that you acquire customers is very different depending upon those settings.

And so I broke it down by the various ways to acquire customers. So one is direct to consumer. And so the form of primary care that acquires customers direct to consumer, in other words the primary care physician themselves is acquiring those customers. One of the prime examples of that as far as like innovative primary care solutions is DPC, is direct primary care where it's a member, it's a monthly membership. It's not fee for service. And what's interesting is that what was discussed is that really the relationship between the physician and the patients and the customers was really instrumental in actually growing the direct to consumer channel for direct primary care practices because as one would expect like word of mouth was one of the primary ways.

Okay, so it was really like like the bedside manner, the personality of the physician, how personable they were. There was a lot around availability as well in terms of the physician being highly available for that patient member, whether it be for virtual visits or nights and weekends, etc. So it wasn't about like, you know, special advertisements or using social media or blah, blah, blah, blah. It was really focused around if you could get that right. And I will add something else that another XPC physician added to was that their practice would actually call every single one of their patients like two days after the visit, just to say, like, or just to ask rather, how's it going? And just that just the effort two days after the visit was sort of like extraordinary for people, right? You want to give people sort of an extraordinary customer experience so that it's remarkable, so that they tell other people about their experience.

And just having the doctor be so concerned that they would actually call you two days after the visit, just to make sure that, you know, to see if there was anything going on or how you were doing. And they found that about 15% of the time when they made that call, like something was up, they couldn't fill the medication, their symptoms had gotten worse, etc, etc. So it was incredibly helpful as far as like scaling DPC. Now, next up is acquiring customers through employers. This is where it not only direct primary care, but then also on-site near-site clinics, that's really another way to acquire patients and customers is by really, it's really working with their employer.

And their employer is the one who is actually paying for the primary care services, again, sort of in a membership fashion, it's not fee-first service. And what was really interesting there during the discussion is that one of the people at the XPC event was an insurance broker. And this insurance broker was in a relatively small town in Texas, and he was able to get one DPC doctor to have an, go from nothing to a full patient panel in 11 months, just by signing up employers for the direct primary care physician.

So what do you call that? Hugely successful. I mean, most direct primary care physicians in America do not have a full practice in 11 months. So to have this broker, so basically there, the acquisition strategy is that you just need to find these sort of stellar brokers, right? So they don't exist everywhere, but to a certain extent, maybe you identify the stellar broker first, and then you create the DPC practice like where the broker is, not vice versa. You don't just create the DPC practice and then try to contact the broker.

It's like, let's just find those brokers. And then wherever those brokers exist, let's build DPC practices like next to them or in their geographic proximity. Okay, next up for government, this is fine, but like for government programs, for people that are on government programs, those two ways of acquiring patients don't really make sense, right? So for the poor and the elderly, they're going to be on Medicaid managed care, that's what MMC is here, or they're going to be on a Medicare Advantage plan.

And so for those folks, it's really with, it's actually through the managed care plan, right? Whether it be the MA plan or the Medicaid managed care plan, that's really going to how you're going to be acquiring patients. And interestingly, we had an executive from a Medicaid managed care plan there. And he said that their organization is most interested in working with primary care physicians who frankly have high engagement with their patient populations. Now, by engagement, it's like, okay, you have an active relationship with you.

The patient actively seeks care from you, as opposed to going to the emergency room or going directly to a specialist. So it's like frequency of interactions, they don't necessarily have to be in-person visits, they could be phone calls, they could be virtual visits. But the point is, is that there was an actual, and by engagement, like I'm going to say, that's just called a good old-fashioned relationship, right? So if you have a working relationship, I might even go as far, I wouldn't want to call it a friendship, but the point is, is that there's mutual trust and understanding.

And that's like gold, right? And if the primary care physician has that, then the Medicaid managed care plan wants to do everything humanly possible to support those types of primary care doctors that have that type of engagement and trust with their patient populations. Okay, fine. But if you're scaling, you can't just grow customers, you have to grow your operations as well. In other words, you have to scale your inputs. Okay, now what's one of the, one of sort of the limiting reagents of inputs for primary care as it scales are the actual clinical staff or the actual clinicians that are interacting with the patients.

And interestingly, the source of that scaling, at least as part of this XPC discussion, was really around nurse practitioners, physicians assistants, and interestingly, pharmacists. And so something that, one of the many things I learned during this session is, is that there's a fair number of primary care practices that are looking to scale, not by adding nurse practitioners and physicians assistants, but rather by adding pharmacists to their clinical staff, because the pharmacist can interact with the patients.

And one of the main things that's super helpful to work with patients is around medication adherence, making sure that they're getting medications, they're taking their medications. Because obviously, like, just like talking to me doesn't necessarily make you better, right? You might have to have some sort of biochemical change in your body, and you're taking a pill in order to make that happen. So if you don't take the pill, then you're not going to lower your blood pressure or better control your diabetes, etc.

So, I mean, not all the time, but a lot of the times you have to have a medication intervention in order to help the person. And so the pharmacists are like instrumental in assisting with that and helping make sure that patients are actually adherent and taking their medications. And then also too, there was discussion around how the, you know, the nurse practitioners and the physician's assistants, they need to have a certain degree of oversight by the primary care doc. But there's actually many ways in which, and again, it's regulated at the state level in terms of what the pharmacist can do in terms of patient interactions.

But there's a lot of independence that the pharmacist can have in terms of their interactions with patients. So I thought that was super interesting in terms of scaling the inputs or the clinical staff for primary care. And then there were, I'll put this last fourth category, just like other. There were lots of other tidbits that were super interesting. So one is that there was a physician there that had gone out with his organization and they had surveyed patients about what would they pay for primary care services.

And interestingly, the direct-to-consumer price point for sort of a membership for primary care services was like 19 to $29 a month. So keep in mind that most direct primary care practices, they're charging 50, 80, 100, $120. And so to a certain extent, is there some sort of scaled back primary care offering that can be done at this 19 to $29 per month price point? And then maybe over time, there's a buy up to more extensive primary care services at that higher membership. But to a certain extent, you kind of have to kind of get people in the door and get them to trust you and get them to be like, wow, this experience is very, very helpful.

And starting out at a 19 to $29 per month price point might be one way to enter into that population that's not willing to fork over the full 80 to 100 bucks per month to start. Okay, next up, one of the administrators for a super huge hospital system in America, one of the largest hospital systems in the country said that look, for their primary care physicians, a quarter to a third of their primary care visits are for musculoskeletal complaints. Okay, so if you're doing direct primary care or on-site near-site clinics or you're doing Medicaid managed care or Medicare Advantage, like you better have good solutions for an MSK, right? What that really means in clinical current terms is like osteoarthritis.

Another name for that is degenerative joint disease, right? And that typically is pain and decreased range of motion and problems with mobility with your knees and your hips and your spine, because those are the weight bearing joints and maybe to a certain extent your hands, because your hands get a lot of osteoarthritis as well. So just know that if you're going into primary care, like you need to have good solutions for your patients around musculoskeletal because it's going to be a quarter to a third of your patient's visits are going to be for that chief complaint.

And then finally, what was really interesting was that many people thought that in this XPC event thought that really primary care was really competing with the ER and urgent care, right? That primary care wasn't necessarily competing with specialists. It wasn't necessarily competing with other primary care physicians, but what it was really competing with was urgent care and ER. Why? Because urgent care in the ER is available 24-7. So to a certain extent that these primary care offerings that are quote unquote innovative can sort of offer something either equal to or close to the availability, right? To a certain extent, just availability is a huge attractor of patients in a business.

And also too, is that the cost for some of these populations in the ER is super low, right? Depending upon whether you could be like a government program or if someone on Medicaid managed care or Medicare Advantage when they go to the ER, like, it might not cost them very much. So like those people are like, okay, well, like if it doesn't really cost me very much and it's open available 24 hours a day, why don't I just use the ER as my primary care venue? And that's incredibly common. A lot of people do use the ER as their primary care venue.

And so it's super important that primary care keeps in mind, okay, well, how can we actually compete with the ER and the urgent care? Because that's actually where we're going to draw a lot of our patients from. So I really wanted to share this X equals primary care organization with you, give you a little bit of information about what we discussed around scaling primary care. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare Z..

