Title: Secret to Primary Care Profitability and Scale_KEtJOzfRyFg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KEtJOzfRyFg
Language: en
Duration: 11:01
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is The Secret to Primary Care Profitability and Scale. Now, as many of you know, Walmart Health has recently shut down and closed all 51 of its Walmart Health Clinics. And Walgreens has either already closed down or is going to close down over 160 of its Village MD Primary Care Clinics. Now, people look at these two examples and say, look, if these huge retail giants can't quote-unquote fix healthcare, then it's unfixable.

Or if Walmart and Village MD can't quote-unquote fix primary care, then it's unfixable. And I am here today to tell you that is 100% not true. And there are already many examples of how primary care is profitable and does scale. And I'm going to show you those right now. So, the biggest thing to take away from the learnings of Walmart and Walgreens, okay, this is what we need to do. This is a highly educational event that has happened. And that highly educational event is that fee-for-service is unprofitable for primary care.

I'm going to say that again. Fee-for-service is unprofitable for primary care. And that's because the value creation from primary care, from all the screenings and the prevention and the chronic disease management, is not then captured in terms of value extraction, in terms of revenue. Primary care from Walmart and Walgreens and Village MD, I guarantee you that there were people in their 50s with undiagnosed diabetes where Walmart and Walgreens Village MD, like, identified it and started treating it and created tremendous value for this 50-some-odd-year-old man or woman.

But they weren't able to extract all the value that they were able to create through that revenue. I guarantee you there were gobs of ER visits that Walmart and Walgreens prevented. I guarantee you there were gobs of hospitalizations and heart attacks and strokes that Walmart and Walgreens prevented. They didn't capture any of that in terms of their revenue. Because fee-for-service in primary care doesn't even come close to capturing the value that is created by primary care. Okay. What economic models do capture that? Okay.

So, guess what? Many hospital systems have primary care at scale. Now, the way that those hospital systems capture value from primary care isn't from fee-for-service, from the actual provision of primary care. No. No. It's because primary care acts as a referral source for highly profitable specialty services like orthopedics, cancer, and cardiovascular services. Okay. So, for hospital systems, it's like Costco where you go in and you buy super cheap paper towels and toilet paper primary care. And then they make much more margin on like the flat screen TV that you buy there.

The flat screen TV cancer surgery or knee replacement that you have. Okay. So, hospitals are just doing the Costco model of the loss leader of primary care. And guess what? That's how you make money from primary care. And that's how you scale primary care if you're a hospital system. Okay. Now, what's another way that primary care scales and primary care is profitable? Well, it's under full risk Medicare Advantage. I will leave a link in the show notes to how I describe in detail how ChenMed is hugely profitable when they take on the full risk, the full capitated risk for Medicare Advantage patients.

And then by keeping them healthier and keeping them out of the hospital and making sure they take their medications and making sure they have like yoga at their clinics and they celebrate their birthdays and they provide transportation and they have food pantries. By doing all these wonderful things for seniors, they are more than profitable when they go at full risk. So, in other words, they have a constant stream of revenue coming in for their patients. They're not billing fee for service. Likewise, direct primary care practices.

I'll leave a link in the show notes to how direct primary care practices can be hugely profitable. All they need to do is charge about $80 to $100 per patient per month and have about 800 patients in their panel. And that direct primary care clinic can be hugely profitable and successful from a business standpoint. One might argue, too, that on-site clinics for employers, again, are like they've been around, they've scaled, they're profitable. Okay? So, again, the employer is paying sort of a subscription model for that on-site clinic.

The on-site clinic is not billing claims to the employer and providing fee for service. No, the employer is essentially paying a monthly fee for the operation of that clinic. Okay. Now, so what does that mean? That means that in the primary care business, like providing a service and then getting paid for that service is not the economic model for the business. And guess what? That's actually incredibly common in business. So, there's many other businesses where, like, they provide the service and the way that they make money is not by, like, what is obviously, like, charging for that service.

Let me give you two examples. Marriott, the hotel company. Do they make money off of charging people to stay at their Marriott hotels? The answer is no. They don't make money off of that at all. Where does Marriott make all their profit margin? Off of the sale of alcohol. That's how Marriott makes all their money. They have hugely high margins. Off of the sale of alcohol at Marriott. You go there. You stay. You eat at their restaurant. You don't buy any alcohol. Marriott makes no money off of you. You go there. You buy alcohol.

That's where Marriott makes their money. Next example. Airlines. You fly an airline. You think the airline makes money by, like, charging you for your seat? No. The airline actually loses money for what they charge you for the seat. How airlines make their money is by partnering with credit card companies for points. And so it's actually the issuance of high interest rate debt by the credit card companies. And they entice you to have more high interest debt through that credit card company because you can earn airline points.

And then the airline's like, well, if you're going to offer points to these credit card people, then you need to give us some of that high margin, high interest rate debt that you're issuing to these credit card holders. And guess what? That's how it works. So here you have two major, the hotel industry and the airline industry. Major services industries that don't make money are not profitable by charging what they actually, at scale, their economic model is not by charging more than what it costs them to deliver the service.

That's not how it works. Okay. Now, let's think about other services businesses that actually do make money in fee for service. Like electricians. Okay. They come out to your house. You've got an electrical thing. You've got to install a ceiling fan or you've got something you've got to do. And plumbers. Okay. So electricians and plumbers are very similar to physicians. Right? It's like a house or a person. It's basically the same idea. Okay. Now, notice. Yes, they can make money. There are not huge nationwide electrician and plumbing companies.

There are local, small and medium-sized businesses. Aha! You mean to tell me that all these private equity firms and all these business people over the years, like, haven't looked at electricians and plumbers and be like, Oh, well, if we could just scale electricians and plumbers, we would make gobs and gobs of money. No! No! Obviously, the investment world has looked at that business model and said, It doesn't work. It doesn't scale. Okay. What does scale? What service does scale? Pest control. We've got Terminex.

We've got Orkin. We've got huge nationwide companies providing services. Why? Pest control is a subscription service with recurring revenue. Electricians and plumbers are not. That is the huge difference. This gets us to our punchline. The value extraction in healthcare is based upon all this value that's created by screening and prevention and chronic disease. And that is not captured through fee-for-service. It's captured in one of two ways. It's either captured in a recurring revenue stream, i.e. a subscription, where you're either taking on premium risk, like running a Medicare Advantage plan or running an insurance company or being a partner like ChenMed.

So you're either going to get it through premium or you're going to get it through a subscription. So you're either going to make primary care profitable through recurring revenue or you're going to do the Marriott airline model where you're using primary care as enticement to high margin inelastic demand services like cancer surgery and cardiovascular care. And orthopedic services. Okay. So basically hospitals use the Marriott alcohol airline. credit card company enticement to high margin inelastic demand model.

And then full risk Medicare Advantage and direct primary care and on-site clinics, they use the premium recurring revenue subscription model. So who's going to win in this business model for primary care? I don't know. But I can tell you right now who's not going to win. Who's not going to win is fee-for-service for primary care. It doesn't work. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

