Title: See the Future of Healthcare By Looking to Medicare_s Past_OAh7Rl7w1wM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAh7Rl7w1wM
Language: en
Duration: 10:46
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is see the future by looking at Medicare's passage. So this reminds me of the Winston Churchill quote, if you want to see the future, look to the past. And the further we look into the past, guess what? It actually tells us exactly what the future of healthcare in America is going to look like. So that's the story I'm going to tell you today. And it starts off like literally a hundred years ago, almost a hundred years ago, with FDR and his New Deal and the passage of Social Security.

Because believe it or not, with the New Deal and the safety net that FDR wanted to create, he wanted healthcare to be a part of that. But he thought it was too risky. Having a healthcare safety net run by the federal government is what FDR had in mind. But he didn't get everything he wanted. And he really wanted Social Security. He really wanted those payments for seniors. So he left healthcare out of it. But it was part of his initial vision. So why did he leave it out? Because doctors and the American Medical Association knew that FDR wanted to do this.

And they said they in no way, shape, or form wanted the government involved in the sacred relationship between the doctor and the patient. So they were vehemently against it. And back then, doctors and the AMA were actually very politically powerful. Now, this needs, this desire coincided with, over the course of the 30s, 40s, 50s, and 60s, tremendous advancements in medicine that required an increase in increase in hospitalization for all the technology that could then be deployed to help people. So before FDR and the New Deal, like, you would go to a hospital to convalesce.

But frankly, there wasn't much you could do there, right? There wasn't even any penicillin. It wasn't until World War II that you had penicillin. You couldn't do any blood transfusions. The first blood bank wasn't invented in America until 1950. So you started having all this healthcare stuff that you could do and so hospitalizations, especially for seniors, started going through the roof because of the revolution in medicine in the 20th century. Okay, so Truman wants to carry the torch to the torch of FDR.

He wants to have a national healthcare safety net. President Kennedy wanted to have a national healthcare safety net. They're carrying the torch. Okay, now, believe it or not, it was the media that actually branded this idea Medicare. And that's where the term Medicare comes from. It wasn't somebody in the government. It was a media term for that healthcare safety net. Now, I gotta tell you a sub-story within the story about a gentleman named Wilbur Mills, who was a Democrat in the House of Representatives from Arkansas.

And he was incredibly powerful because he was the head of the Ways and Means Committee. In other words, the subcommittee of the House where all this, we were going to have legislation around healthcare. It was going to start in his subcommittee. And he was a really interesting guy. So back then, he was a really interesting guy. So back then, the Democratic Party was very different because you had a gazillion Southern Democrats and you actually had a group of very fiscally conservative Democrats. Okay, the Democratic Party of today and the Democratic Party of today and the Democratic Party back in the 1950s was very different.

They called Dixiecrats, right? Now, he actually blocked Medicare under Truman and Kennedy because, interestingly, because he was such a, he was a tax aficionado and a fiscal conservative as a Democrat. You know what? He said Medicare was going to be too expensive. And of course, he was right. But he says, look, I don't have an ideological problem with Medicare. We just can't afford it. And so that's why he never let it get passed. And the AMA had obviously very close relationship with Wilbur Mills because he was stopping this Medicare, which the AMA didn't want.

Okay, so as a small concession, they passively called the Kerr-Mills Act, which was going to be sort of a Medicare light to be administered by the states. Now, there were very strict criteria of who would qualify for this government-sponsored health care run by the states. So it was very small, but it was a teeny, into, into baby step in 1960 called the Kerr-Mills Act. Mills being his name, Kerr being another congressman from Oklahoma. Okay, so then things changed dramatically in the 1964 election when LBJ beats Barry Goldwater.

And there is essentially an across-the-ticket Democrat landslide for Congress and the Senate. And so this idea, this New Deal safety net of health care is still on the agenda, right? FDR, Truman, Kennedy, LBJ. LBJ did not make this idea up. Okay, I was incorrect. I thought LBJ with his great society, I thought he came up with this idea. That's totally wrong. This idea has been in the Democratic playbook for a long time. So, they wanted to do this hospital program because hospitalizations were so expensive. But then there was another group of more conservative folks in Congress who said, well, we want to do this.

And they actually buy some Republicans who said, well, can we make it optional and individuals actually have to pay into it? And that would be a, and that was a competing idea with this hospital insurance. They're like, we'll just have people pay premium in and it will only be for doctor coverage. Okay? So, then you get the sausage making of how legislation is actually made. And so, in order to get it past Mills, who didn't want to do anything, they basically had to make some sausage where they combined this hospital paid, this government paid hospital program, plus this optional doctor program.

And they combined it with Kerr Mills and they called it the three layer cake. And it became Medicare. And that's why we have Medicare Part A, which is the hospital coverage. That was one idea for legislation. That's why we have Medicare B, where you actually have to pay premium. And that's the doctor coverage. Okay, that was a second piece of legislation. And that's why you have Medicaid. Because that's what Kerr Mills became, administered by the states, right? That's Medicaid. So, ever wonder why we have Medicare Part A and Part B and Medicaid is part of CMS? It's because of the sausage making that was needed in 1965 to get the legislation passed.

Fascinating. Now, here is what they did. And the AMA knew that they were lost. But this is what they did to finally get the doctors and the hospitals on their side. Mills said, you know what? We'll let doctors and hospitals themselves decide what reasonable charges are. And we, the government, will just pay it. That's right. They let hospitals and doctors decide what they would get paid. And guess what happened? The cost went through the roof. And it wasn't until prospective payment in the early 1980s under Ronald Reagan that they finally said, hey, let's actually have the government set the reimbursement rate, not the doctors and hospitals themselves.

Okay. Let me wrap it up here. Here's the punchline. Here's the final vote. In the House for Medicare, it was 237 Democrats yes. 70 Republicans said yes. In the House, 48 Democrats said no. And 68 Republicans said no. Look at that. Almost the same number of Republicans said yes and no. And there was a large number of Democrats that said no. What is this? It's like there was bipartisan support for it and the Republicans were totally split. Okay. Next up, in the Senate, 57 Democrats were in favor of it. 13 Republicans were in favor of it and against it.

Seven Democrats were against it and 17 Republicans are against it. Again, the number of Republicans against it and the number of Republicans for it was like the same. Like, you would never see this type of voting. You didn't see this type of voting in Obamacare. You would never see this type of voting. So, what is the point? The point of all this is that the socialized medicine, the state-paid-for health care safety net in America has been part of a democratic arc ever since FDR. Through every president in between.

Jimmy Carter wanted to do it. Bill Clinton wanted to do it. Barack Obama actually got some of it with Obamacare. And Joe Biden is doing it again. It has been on the arc for a hundred years. What is... It has many implications. What is one practical implication? Why in the world is United making all these acquisitions and becoming a vertically integrated health care system? They're not dummies. They know this is going to happen. Okay. It's been happening for a hundred years. It might take another 25, 50, another hundred years.

It is going to happen. And United is positioning themselves to be a massive government contractor for when the government eventually takes over health care. They essentially are going to be the Lockheed Martin of health care. So, if we want to see the future, all we have to do is look to the past. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Thank you..

