Title: Shareholder Activism in Healthcare_ From HCA Healthcare to Cigna to Express Scripts_9jLvJFvdVaU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9jLvJFvdVaU
Language: en
Duration: 8:33
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is shareholder activism as a mechanism for healthcare change. Now I'll admit I didn't ever think of this before and then I read an article from Becker's Hospital Review and I found it fascinating. So, this article talks about a HCA shareholder. So in other words the largest publicly traded hospital company in America, Fortune 500, HCA, based in Nashville, Tennessee, they got a shareholder. And that shareholder wrote an open letter and said, hey we need to put out for a vote among the HCA shareholders that we think that HCA should change the way that their executives are compensated.

They need to be compensated much more on healthcare quality than they currently are. Now this particular shareholder only has 410 shares. So at the end of the day they're trying to be an activist but they don't really hold that much HCA. And right now HCA's executive compensation is 80% based on EBITDA or earnings, right? And only 20% based on quality. And so this shareholder is saying it's got to be a lot more quality because if you focus 80% of the executive comp on EBITDA then it's way too short-sighted.

You're not thinking for the long run. And as a result that you as executives of the company are actually not incentivized for long-term shareholder value. Okay, is it valid or not? Listen, that's just their opinion. HCA, the board of HCA has a different opinion than that. But let's think about that as it pertains to other publicly traded healthcare companies, right? So there's Tenet, which is also a very large publicly traded hospital corporation. There's Community Health Services, CHS, which is also a large publicly traded hospital system.

Then of course you have United Health Group and CVS Health, which owns Aetna. You've got Cigna, which owns Express Scripts. You've got Anthem. So you've got all these major health insurance carriers that are also obviously publicly traded companies. And all of these companies could have activist shareholders. And there's actually a reason why an activist shareholder would want to get involved with these publicly traded companies and have their executives compensated in a different fashion. And that's because obviously healthcare is so expensive, health insurance is so expensive, people do not have access to healthcare.

And so as a result of that, the Affordable Care Act was passed in 2010. And when it was passed in 2010, Senator Harry Reid, who was the leader of the Senate at the time, said, look, the ACA is just the first person that's the first person that's the And look, the ACA is just the first step in the process. It is not the end goal. Listen, this is the first step. And the next step is the public option. And the next step after that is Medicare for all or single payer. Okay, so like the public option and Medicare for all is essentially an existential threat to publicly traded hospitals and publicly traded health insurance carriers.

I mean, like, if this happens, if the public option has to be a If this happens and Medicare for all happens, that could potentially erode, like, all of the shareholder value, it could all be gone, if that's the case, because the government can decide, okay, tenants, CHS, HCA, we're just going to pay you X. Like, that's what we're going to do. Likewise, for all the health insurance carriers, they'll just be like, look, you can only make, you know, so right now, they got a 20%, you know, or 15% loss ratio, 80, 85% loss ratio.

The government's like, hey, next year, it'll be 12%. Next year, it'll be 10%. Next year, it'll be 8%. What are you going to do? There's no other game in town besides us, the government. Okay, so arguably, a government takeover of health care for the shareholders acting totally in their self interest, like not wanting the executive compensation to be based on quality as a function of like doing being a do gooder, but as a way of preserving long term shareholder value. Because look, if there's an eventual government takeover, because either the quality is bad, or it's just too expensive, then that's just going to destroy long term shareholder value.

And these folks with their 410 shares are taking an activist role. Now granted, probably nothing's going to come of that. Okay, but there's a precedent for this. Who is the most famous activist shareholder of all time? It is Carl Icahn. Now, back in the 80s, they didn't call it an activist investor. They call them corporate raiders. He buys 2%, 5%, 10% of a company. He says, look, you got to give me some board seats. He takes the board seats. He says, look, your CEO's not doing a good job. They get rid of the CEO. They change some of the policies.

And as a result of that strategy being a corporate raider, activist investor, Carl Icahn has returned a 31% per year return since 1968. I mean, Warren Buffett's at like 20%. I mean, Carl Icahn's at 50% better than Warren Buffett. Okay? And he uses a totally different approach than Warren Buffett. Warren Buffett's at like, I buy great companies. Carl Icahn's at like, I buy companies that are being run by people who should not be running them, and I change it. They're doing things they shouldn't be doing, and I change it.

Okay? Now, he did this with Express Scripts and Cigna. When Cigna was going to buy Express Scripts, he owned a small percentage of Cigna. Carl Icahn owned a small percentage. He wrote an open letter. He said, look, this purchase of Express Scripts is a terrible idea. You're paying way too much. He said, look, the entire revenue model for Express Scripts through rebates is just a completely flawed revenue model. He's like, look, there's huge regulatory risks. The federal government could just wipe out Express Scripts over time if it wanted to.

And Amazon's getting into the pharmacy business. So you have the government and the most competitive company in America, potentially the world, who's getting into your sandbox. And you mean to tell me that you want to pay over $50 billion for Express Scripts? And guess what? Like, the shareholders didn't agree with him, and he abandoned this entire idea. Okay, so it didn't work. But the point was, is that Carl Icahn, like, was moving in the direction of being a healthcare activist investor. Not because he wanted to fix healthcare or change healthcare, but because he saw how the existing executives and the existing management in these healthcare companies were eroding long-term shareholder value.

So that got me thinking. I mean, here is another force for change within healthcare. Because think about it. The sort of, you know, profiteering or price gouging or whatever you want to call it, that's very short-sighted, right? If you dig a pit, you're going to fall into it, right? It's the karma, right? The circle of karma is likely going to come back on hospitals and health insurance carriers. And for the sake of a long-term, for the sake of long-term shareholder value, like, you want to do good karma things so that you don't completely eliminate your long-term value.

Okay, so fine. So who in the world is this person that has the 410 shares? It's graphic benevolent trust fund. What in the world is that? It's the life insurance policy or the death benefit policy for the Teamsters. The Teamsters Union, which is one of the largest unions in America. They have 1.4 million members. 10% of all union members are in the Teamsters. The Teamsters are planning on being around for a while. Maybe they feel emboldened right now. And they're saying, look, HCA, we think you should change your executive compensation policy.

And I thought that was fascinating. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

