Title: Specialty Pharmacy Scam - Same Drug Ranges from _37.41 to _2_172_TlUyn6yaJOE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TlUyn6yaJOE
Language: en
Duration: 7:29
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is generic specialty medication scam revealed. That's right. Today we're going to talk about a scam in generic specialty medications. And it's specifically around a medication called Tecfidera. Now Tecfidera is the brand name of a medication that's generic name is dimethyl fumarate. And it is a medication for multiple sclerosis. And the brand name Tecfidera became available as a generic towards the end of 2020. So now it's available as dimethyl fumarate.

You take it as a 240 milligram pill twice a day. So it's still considered a specialty medicine. So even though it's a pill in a person's prescription benefits through their employer, it's typically still considered quote unquote specialty pharmacy. Now, one would think that the generic dimethyl fumarate would be very inexpensive, right? Brand name, it was very expensive. Now that it's generic, great. We can save a whole bunch of money. So let's look at the cost of the generic dimethyl fumarate. Okay. And this is through GoodRx, which actually uses a multiple different PBMs on the back end.

And you don't use your insurance. You just paid cash for it, but they're still running it through PBMs on the back end. Now, isn't this interesting? So HEB, which is a big grocery store chain in Texas, the cost is $37.41 for a month supply. Okay. Giant, which is big in the Washington, D.C. area, $39.21. Publix for all of you in the South, $40.41. ShopRite in the Northeast, $88.07. And then for those of you in the Chicago land area, Jewelosco, $104.90. Okay. Great. Sounds pretty good. Now let's look at some other locations.

Again, through GoodRx, Costco. Things are supposed to be inexpensive at Costco, right? Costco, the lowest price, right? Costco, $1,500. Walmart, things are supposed to save money, live better at Walmart, right? Walmart, $1,593. Walgreens, $2,086. Again, this is just for a one month supply. If you want to, and you've got to take this every day. So, for a year, you take all these numbers, you multiply them by 12. That's what you've got to spend. CVS, $2,172. This all came about because I was looking at an employer's pharmacy spend recently, and they were spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on dimethyl fumarate.

And they were getting it all through the mail order specialty pharmacy from their PBM. Remember, the big three PBMs own specialty pharmacies that the members can get mail order through that specialty pharmacy. It's supposed to save you money, right? Guess what? The PBM specialty pharmacy prices were in line with this side over here in thousands of dollars a month. Not in this side over here in $37 a month. So, this is a huge scam. This is a commodity. The dimethyl fumarate for $37 and the dimethyl fumarate for $2,100, it's the exact same pill.

Dr. Reddy's is one of the big companies globally that makes the generic version of this. Okay, this is a commodity. If one organization is charging $2,000 and another organization is charging $37, then the organization that is charging the $2,000, they're adding no value. It's a commodity. Okay? So, let's break this down for an employer. Okay, so multiple sclerosis, MS, neurological disease, it's actually an autoimmune disease. It's filled with a sporadic neurological deficit. Sometimes the person can be blind, they can lose bladder control, they can have weakness, they can lose the ability to walk.

So, it affects all over your nervous system and it comes and goes. It's an incredibly, it's a very challenging disease. I've treated many patients with multiple sclerosis over the years. Now, typically it strikes between the ages of 20 and 50, so the employed population, right? If there's a million people in America, one million people that have multiple sclerosis, well, there's about 203 million Americans that are between the ages of 18 and 65 who would be an adult who might be on an employer-sponsored plan.

So, if you do the ratio, that means that there's going to be one person with MS out of every 203 adults between the ages of 18 and 65. So, if your ratio is 1 to 203, if you're an employer within a thousand adults on your plan, that means you probably have five people on your plan with MS. And Tecfidera dimethylfumarate is a very common medication for MS. So, if you get five people with MS, that means that if they're getting it through their PBM specialty pharmacy, or at one of these places like Costco, Walmart, Walgreens, or CVS, that means that that employer is spending approximately $130,000 a year for those five patients just for their dimethylfumarate.

Whereas, let's just say, you know, on average, let's say they got it for 50 bucks, not for 37, not for 88, but let's just say they got it for $50 a month. That would cost them about $3,000 per year. That means that this employer is spending an extra $127,000 on a scam. Okay, likewise, if the employer has 10,000 employees, that means they likely have 50 employees with MS, which means they're probably spending about $1.3 million on dimethylfumarate, where they really shouldn't be spending about $30,000 on dimethylfumarate.

So again, they're spending $1.27 million, essentially, on a scam. And so, what is something that an employer could do? Let's be practical about solutions here. Like, don't cover dimethylfumarate. If you're a self-funded employer, be like, we're done. We don't want your PBM, quote unquote, discounts anymore. We're just not going to cover it. Okay, that doesn't mean you're leaving your patients with MS out to dry. You just say to them, look, just submit your receipt, and we'll give you all the money for it. We'll give you the full $37.

We'll give you the full $88. We'll cover it completely. Shoot, just write them a check for $3,000 and be like, look, call it a day. We'll just give you $3,000 to pay for your dimethylfumarate. Go forth and find a pharmacy. Use your GoodRx discount. Fantastic. Look, there's a lot of these programs for lowering specialty pharmacy costs where you don't cover it with the plan, but then you use a patient assistance program. You don't need a patient assistance program to get dimethylfumarate for $39. You don't need a patient assistance program.

You just use the GoodRx app. Okay? So, one would argue that if you, listen, everyone who works in employee benefits, an employer sponsored plan, this should not be news to any of you. If you are a director of benefits, you should know this. And if you don't know this, then you need to ask your benefit consultant, why? You need to ask your pharmacy consultant, why? Why is some random doctor on a video telling you about this? You should already know about this. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching AHOP Care C..

