Title: State Insurance Commissioners Do Not Protect Patients_MOIESK6GK6k
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MOIESK6GK6k
Language: en
Duration: 11:35
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is State Insurance Commissioners. Now I'm going to tell you a true story, and frankly, this true story is incredibly sad, so it's a little hard to listen to. So, News 13 in New Mexico, back in 2015, did a story by their investigative reporter, Larry Barker. And it's on YouTube, I'll leave a link to it in the show notes so you can watch this reporting from Larry Barker himself. So, he does a story on the Janos family, a young couple that had premature triplets.

And one of the triplets died within days, and then the second triplet died within several weeks, like on Thanksgiving. And their third triplet was, so two of them passed away in Lovelace Hospital. And then the third triplet was in the neonatal ICU, the NICU, for over four months. And then, as is the case with many premature babies, continued to have many problems after leaving the NICU. And having to have lots of specialist visits, etc, etc. So, all told, their bills for all three of the triplets totaled $3.8 million.

And, of course, it's one of these horrible nightmare stories about the Janos family themselves getting bills for tens and tens of thousands of dollars for things that their insurance company is not covering. So, it's the classic surprise medical bill problem. Many of you are familiar with this dynamic because of the federal law that was recently passed, where the neonatologists, the doctors in the NICU, they were out of network. And, in fact, they worked for a company called Sheridan that was a staffing firm that was based out of Florida, even though the Janos family was in New Mexico.

So, sure, Loveless Hospital was in network with Blue Cross, their insurance company, but the NICU doctors weren't, and the type of insurance plant they had didn't have out of network coverage. So, Sheridan was sending bills for tens of thousands of dollars to the Janos family. Okay. So, Blue Cross, Blue Shield, New Mexico, again, in network hospital, out of network doctors. And, of course, you know, this is just a total travesty on the part of both the physician group and the insurance company, right? One, the physician group, like, even though it was like a life-threatening situation for their children, they still need to disclose that they're out of network.

And Blue Cross, Blue Shield is part of their policy. They need to disclose that they don't have out of network coverage. And also, too, they should never sell a policy in the first place when you're in an emergency and you're out at an in-network hospital that you're still stuck with the bills for out-of-network physicians at that hospital. It's referred to as a RAPS policy with a lot of insurance policies. Radiologists, anesthesiologists, and pathologists are oftentimes out of network at in-network hospitals.

And so if the insurance policy has a RAPS policy, then those out-of-network RAPS doctors would be covered as in-network. Okay, so fine. So that means the insurance company would have to cover the billed charges that they don't have a negotiated amount with with those RAPS physicians. Okay, but this wasn't a radiologist. This wasn't an anesthesiologist. It wasn't a pathologist. It was a neonatologist. Who knows what the fine print of their policy said? But Blue Cross wasn't covering it and they were having to pay tens of thousands of dollars, which of course they did not have the money for.

Okay, so that's the exact reason why the federal government passed the surprise medical bill law. Now, it goes into effect January 1 of 2022 where the insurance carrier and the out-of-network physician group, they have to go into arbitration and they leave the patient out of it. So in other words, the physician group can't go after the patient anymore. And the health insurance company can't just be like, oh, we're not going to cover you. So it has to go through arbitration. Okay, so fine. This is a brand spanking new law that has not even gone into effect yet and it is a federal law.

Why in the world am I talking about a federal law and the Janos family when the topic of today's video is state insurance commissioners? Well, here's why. Okay, and it's because of the McCarran-Ferguson Act, which I described in a previous video, which was passed in 1945 by FDR right before he died. World War II was raging. And we decided as a country that it was a good idea to exempt insurance companies from federal regulation because we thought that was a good idea. We said things like the Sherman Antitrust Act, you know what, that's just not going to apply to insurance company, health insurance company, property and casualty insurance companies.

You know, we've got a big war going on. Let's just make these insurance companies not exempt to the Sherman Antitrust Act and not exempt to federal law. We'll just do it at the state level. Who in the world would sponsor such legislation? Well, of course, the NAIC, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. So they proposed this legislation to McCarran and Ferguson, who were, one was a Republican and one was a Democrat, and they passed it through Congress and the Senate. And they had the president sign it.

Now, of course, they had all these good reasons for doing that. Okay, the end result, baseball and insurance, the two industries in America that were exempt from the Sherman Antitrust Act. Okay, so fine. Why in the world did this happen, right? Why is insurance regulated at the state level? I'm watching this report by Larry Barker from News 13 in New Mexico, and I'm like, this is interstate commerce. You've got people in Florida and doctors that are employed from, people in New Mexico, and you've got a physician group from Florida.

Like, that's interstate commerce. That's federal. That is not state. And Larry talks to the state insurance commissioner. I'm like, why aren't the feds involved in this? Okay, keep in mind, it's back in 2015, right? Okay, so McCarran and Ferguson's still in full effect. Okay, what happened was, back in 1944, the United States sued the Southeastern Underwriters Association, took it to the Supreme Court, and guess what the Supreme Court ruled? The Supreme Court ruled that insurance was actually interstate commerce, and therefore, subject to the federal government.

Duh! Right? And so, the National Association Insurance Commission was like, whoa, whoa, whoa, we need to expressly pass a law that goes against what the Supreme Court just said. We can't have the federal government get involved in our state regulation of insurance. And so that's why they specifically passed the McCarran-Furris law to say that, look, how insurance, not interstate commerce, not subject to any trust. Now, interestingly, the plot gets thicker. So, in February of 2021, as one of the last things that President Trump did by passage in the House and, like, unanimous voice vote in the Senate, they passed CHIRA, the Competitive Health Insurance Reform Act.

What does CHIRA do? It repeals the McCarran-Ferguson Act as it relates to health insurance. Not property casualty insurance, but for health insurance. So, the McCarran-Ferguson exemption for antitrust legislation, the Sherman Antitrust Act, not applying to health insurance, they'll apply. In other words, the Sherman Antitrust Act now applies to health insurance, which means that the feds can now go after and regulate health insurance companies. And guess what? The National Association of Insurance Commissioners wrote an angry letter to Mitch McConnell in the Senate, saying President Ray Farmer, the president of the NAIC, says this is totally unnecessary.

CHIRA is totally unnecessary. We, at the state level, we don't allow monopolies and price fixing and collusion and anti-competitive behavior. We protect consumers. Therefore, you don't need to pass CHIRA because we already do this. I would argue that the Janos family and Larry Barker would take issue with what Ray Farmer wrote in that letter. If what Ray Farmer said was true, then the Janos family would already be protected. If what Ray Farmer said was true, then there would be no need to pass the federal surprise medical bill law because consumers would already be protected by the states.

But clearly they're not because they had to pass the federal surprise bill and the Janos family was totally in a tight spot in 2015 because the state insurance commissioners were not protecting the consumers to the extent that they maybe could have. Okay? So, begs the question, what is Ray Farmer's background? He was the former American Insurance Association vice president. That's right. He was the vice president of the lobbying group for insurance companies. He's the insurance commissioner for the state of South Carolina.

Now, I'm not saying that there is a connection between him being a lobbyist and now being the president of the National Association of the Regulators. So, here you have somebody who worked for a lobbying organization who now is a lead regulator in his state and is the head of the regulator association for the country. Now, I'm not saying that that's necessarily wrong, but I'm saying that appears to be interesting. Okay? And I'll even leave him one more note. So, when they were actually thinking about, like in 2005, repealing the McCarran-Ferguson Act.

They've been trying to get rid of this thing for a long time. They finally succeeded this year, right? And Congressman Sensenbrenner from Wisconsin makes the most ridiculous argument. I'll leave a link in the show note for that video, too. He makes the most ridiculous argument for preserving the McCarran-Ferguson antitrust exemption for insurance companies. And I'm like, this is weird. Like, what? Like, no rational person would be making this argument. And then I looked up who Representative Sensenbrenner's largest donors were.

The industry that donated more money to Representative Sensenbrenner, more so than any other industry, was the insurance industry. You can't make this up, America. So, it's a complicated story. But at the end of the day, listen, at the end of the day, Blue Cross for Show in New Mexico, they ended up eating it. They ended up paying for the whole thing. But good for Larry Barker. If he hadn't have done that, Blue Cross and Blue Shield would have never done that. They did the whole thing where they, like, confronted the CEO of Blue Cross and Blue Shield in New Mexico.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield in New Mexico CEO. I have no apology. That's what he said. And then Blue Cross pays the whole thing. So, hats off to News 13 for their fantastic work. And I wanted to share that with you today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

