Title: Statistics in Healthcare... Don_t Get Fooled _Key to Understanding Error Explained in Plain English__fhRTlQ_hqkk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hqkk
Language: en
Duration: 10:33
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is statistics in healthcare finance. Don't get fooled. So this is the most complicated A Healthcare Z video that I have ever made. It is going to involve math, but I think you're ready for it. Now, it involves statistical errors. There are two types. There's type one errors and type two errors. Gotta love statisticians. Okay, what is a type one error? It is a false positive. It is an error of commission. Let me give you an example of this.

So like you have a strep test on your kid, the strep test for a sore throat, the strep test comes back positive, but they actually don't have strep. Okay, that's a false positive. That's a type one error. And it's an error of commission because you're probably going to give antibiotics for the kid with strep and you shouldn't have. So it was an error of commission. Next, you have type two errors, which are false negatives. In other words, it's an error of omission. What's an example of a type two error? When the strep test is negative, they swab the kid's throat.

They say, hey, it's negative. But the kid actually has strep. And so you don't treat the kid with antibiotics, but you should have because they actually had strep. Okay, so that's why it's an error of omission. Now, let's talk about the mathematical calculation of specificity and sensitivity because that's how these things are measured. So every test has a sensitivity and a specificity. And you got to know both. They're actual numbers. They're fractions or decimals or percentages. So the specificity is the people who test negative for strep, who really don't have strep, divided by the people who test negative, who really don't have strep at all, plus the people who tested positive for strep, but actually don't have it either.

And we actually know the specificity for strep tests. It's 98%. All right, next we have the sensitivity. And the sensitivity is the people who tested positive for it, really have it. So true positives divided by the number of people who tested positive for it, who really have it, plus the people who tested negative for it, but actually have it, the false negatives. And that sensitivity is also calculated for a strep test. It's 90%. So we know those numbers. Now, one of the truisms of testing is the higher the specificity, the lower the sensitivity.

And the higher the sensitivity, the lower the specificity. So if you dial one up, by definition, you dial the other one down. Now, some tests are better than others. And overall, they have better sensitivity and specificity. But I'm just saying, in general, just know that everything, there's no free lunch, right? If you're going to dial up one, you're going to dial down on the other. Okay. Now, you're like, okay, that's all I need to know, right? Wrong. If what you need to know next is the prevalence of X, the prevalence of the disease, in this case, the prevalence of strep throat.

But without knowing the prevalence, it's impossible for you to make sense of the sensitivity and specificity of a test. So that is super important. Anybody says to you, hey, the sensitivity and the specificity are 99% and 99%. Wonderful. That sounds like an amazing test. What is the prevalence of the thing that it's testing for? And I'll tell you why that's so important. Okay. So the prevalence is just the number of people within a population that actually have the disease over the total population. We actually know that number for strep.

For kids ages five to 10, it's 25%. That's for kids with a sore throat ages five to 10. So not all kids with a sore throat going into pediatrician's office has strep throat. 25% of them have strep throat. Likewise, for adults, adults don't tend to get strep as much. It's only 5% of adults with a sore throat actually have strep throat. Okay. Now, what we really want to know is not the specificity and the sensitivity. We want to know, okay, if you have a positive stress stress test, like what's the chance that that positive stress stress test is correct on your kid.

Okay. And that's called the positive predictive value. And what I'm going to show you here is that as a box that you have to create in order to actually calculate the positive predictive value and the negative predictive value. Now, in order to do this box, you have to have the prevalence. So just know that anytime anybody talks about sensitivity and specificity, you have to know the prevalence of the underlying disease. Okay. Now, what you have here is you get the, the, you have to have all the positives. The disease is on top.

The truth is on the top and the tests are on the bottom. And you have to have all the people that actually have strep throat add up to 25 in this first column. And you have to have all the people that really don't have strep throat add up in the second column, which equals a 75. And then you got to do some math to plug in these numbers of 23, one, two, and 74. And what that gives you is, and I won't tell you how you solve for that in this video. There's plenty of resources online that can tell you how to do that.

But just know if you want to actually do this, you got to create that box. Okay. So then you get the positive predictive value, which is the 23, the people that test positive for the disease that actually have the disease divided, divided by the people that actually have the disease, the plus the 23 plus the one person who tested positive for the disease, who actually doesn't have the disease. And that gets you 23 divided by four, which is 96%. In other words, if you have a kid who's five to 10 who tests positive for strep, then you know with 96% certainty that that kid actually has strep.

Good. That's what you want to know. Now, the negative predictive value is this number down here. It's the 74 divided by seven. In other words, the people who test the negative, who actually are negative, divided by 74 plus the people who are, who test, who actually are negative, but they tested positive as a false positive. So you do 74 divided by 74 plus two, essentially 74 divided by 76, which gets you 97%. And what the negative predictive value is, is okay, well, if the strep test is negative, then with 97% certainty, you know that your kid does not have strep.

Okay. So for kids five to 10, this is pretty good. The test comes back positive with 96% certainty, you can say you got strep. And if the test comes back negative with 97%, you can say this kid doesn't have strep. Okay. But let's apply that now to a much lower prevalence of 5% in adults. Okay. Then you plug in all these numbers with a 5% prevalence, then that means the positive predictive value in an adult for a positive strep test going, oh, I've got a sore throat, swabs your throat, test is positive. You only have with 69% certainty that it's actually true.

Okay. You probably still go ahead and take the antibiotics, but there is a significant number of people, 31% of people who are taking those antibiotics. They don't need to. Okay. Next up, the negative predictive value, because it's more rare, the negative predictive value of, hey, you don't have strep, it's even better. So that means that if you have a negative strep test, it's 99% accurate that you actually don't have strep because it's more rare. It's more accurate if you have a negative strep test. Okay. So what does this mean? This means in practical applications, in plain English, that if you have a condition that's rare and you get a positive test, then you need to question that test.

It might be wrong. And if you have a very common condition and you have a negative test for it, well, you need to question that negative test. Now, how does that specifically apply to employee benefits? Well, a lot of groups do biometric testing for their employees and they test their blood pressure for hypertension. And the largest group of employees is millennials. So believe it or not, the prevalence of hypertension in people ages 18 to 39 is only 7.5%. Okay. So, you know, the prevalence of hypertension in your employee population for that age group is only 7.5%.

Now, those automatic blood pressure cuffs that they always use for the screening, we actually know the specificity and the sensitivity for that. Okay. They're 80% sensitive and they're 68% specific. Okay. So not nearly as good as the strep test is. Now, let's then, if you just apply that math and create one of those boxes for a 7.5% prevalence, 80% sensitivity and 68% specificity, what you get is a positive predictive value of 17%. That's right. If someone's like 25 and their blood pressure reading is elevated and it says they have hypertension, that means only 17% of the time, that's right.

In other words, it's wrong the majority of the time. That means that for your population, if they have a blood pressure reading that is elevated and says that they have hypertension, the majority of the time that's wrong. Okay. What else does that mean? That means that the negative predictive value is 98%. If the person doesn't have hypertension, you're like 120 over 8, you look great. Because hypertension is so rare in that age group, you're 98% sure of it. Okay. So, practical application. Would you ever provide a financial incentive or penalty based upon the control, the actual numeric value of somebody's blood pressure for an employee population? It is 18 to 39.

No, because your test would be wrong so frequently. Right? So, this is a very important concept, a very complicated concept, that whenever you work with statistics and testing in healthcare and health insurance and employee benefits, you have to understand sensitivity, specificity. And anytime somebody tells you those, immediately you need to ask, what's the prevalence? I got to know the prevalence. Without the prevalence, I can't tell you anything about that test. And then you create a box and you calculate the positive predictive value and the negative predictive value.

Because it's those two that are going to tell you the value of that test result. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare..

