Title: Stock Market Impact on Healthcare Investing_ Private Equity Booms___X3hpyeQaKDk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X3hpyeQaKDk
Language: en
Duration: 4:03
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Brigger and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is the stock market impact on healthcare and specifically we're going to talk about healthcare investing today. Now, I apologize, I'm a little under the weather so I am losing my voice, but please bear with me. Okay, so pension funds and endowments of universities, they set an asset allocation for their billions and billions of dollars that they have. And at a high level that asset allocation is about 51% bonds, 28% equities, in other words US and international stocks, 6% real estate, 5% private equity, 4% other and 6% cash.

And it's this 5% private equity that we're specifically going to talk about today as it relates to healthcare. Now, as many of you do probably with your own investing and as many of you probably already know with these large pension funds and endowments that when one of these areas increases in value, they rebalance their portfolio. In other words, because the stock market has gone up so much since the great recession of 2008, 2009, more and more money has had to be shifted out of stocks and into other areas.

Okay. And one of those other areas that they have rebalanced into is private equity. And as a result of that, the amount of money that is in private equity has increased from about $670 billion and it has doubled to $1.28 trillion in the past 10 years. So that is a huge influx of cash in the private equity world. It's referred to as dry powder. And so that money needs to be put to work. And that's where these private equity firms then go out and they buy companies. So how does this relate to healthcare? Okay. Well, provider private equity.

In other words, private equity firms investing in providers, whether it be physician groups or imaging centers or ambulatory surgery centers, etc. So in other words, the folks that are actually providing healthcare, the amount of money that is from private equity into providers has doubled in the past year. In one year alone is gone up to $30 billion. And that's per year. So in other words, the year before it was 15. Now it's 30. Okay. By the way, that 30 billion in providers is more than investment in pharmaceutical and biopharma companies.

It's more than med tech or medical device companies. It's more than, uh, than pay on the payer side to put it in context. The payer size only 1 billion a year and the provider side is 30 times bigger at 30 billion. So when you hear all these huge deals about team health and vision and literally my physician buddies that are in private practices, their practices get called like almost weekly. I was talking to a urologist last week at a conference and he said that his urology group gets called like weekly from private equity firms wanting to buy their practice.

And why is this important to you? These private equity firms are buying these providers because they are looking to turn them into a profit center as a way to make money. So they're going to do that by charging more for healthcare for increasing the unit cost of healthcare or increasing the amount of provision of healthcare that's provided by these providers. So I just want to let you know from an investment standpoint, what is going on behind the scenes and how the stock market actually relates to private equity and healthcare.

And thank you for watching a healthcare Z..

