Title: Study Claims Healthcare Cost-Sharing Kills People_ But It is Not Peer Reviewed_p9b4TRpO7yc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p9b4TRpO7yc
Language: en
Duration: 7:49
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching AHealthcareZ. Today's topic is study claims cost sharing kills, but it's not peer reviewed. So what am I talking about? So according to a couple of online publications, Vox and Axios, they reported on a study by Chandra et al. from February of 2021, so just this month. And the title of the study is the health cost of cost sharing. And it examined the impact of co-pays and co-insurance, out of pocket costs by patients for prescription medications and its effect on mortality.

And like the headline read, cost sharing kills people. The headline from Vox literally said it causes more deaths. And the headline from Axios said cost sharing doesn't work. Okay, so obviously you, you know, if it bleeds it leaves, right? You've got to make it sound enticing vis-a-vis what the study title was. But let's take a closer look at the study itself. Now, it is from the National Bureau of Economic Research, the NBER. Now, it is a private organization that you can go to their website and check them out.

And they, and it's non-partisan economic research. It's filled with all these economists from all over the country. They get public funding, they get private funding, they publish 1,200 working papers per year. That's a lot of publications. Okay? Now, it expressly says that these working papers, they're still working, are for, the reason that they put them out there is for discussion and comment. Discussion and comment. It doesn't just say that these are definitive findings. It says these working papers are for discussion and comment.

Why does it specifically say this? Because it says specifically that the NBER publications are not peer reviewed. In other words, there are not experts in that particular field that have actually gone through the methodology of the research and determined amongst their peers that it is credible and worthy of publication. In other words, the NBER is publishing non-peer-reviewed research. Now, is that a good thing? Is that a bad thing? It's a thing. Okay? We just need to understand that it's not peer reviewed.

Okay? So, why is this important? Well, let's take a look at a little bit of the details of the methodology for how Chandra et al studied the impact of cautionary on mortality. Okay. So, what they did is they looked specifically at the Medicare population only. Not only did they only look at the Medicare population, they only looked at people in the first year of their Medicare eligibility because of a unique quote unquote, they call it a quirk in the first year of Medicare. And that is you become eligible for Medicare when you turn 65, but because of your birth birth month, January, February, March, April, May, June, July, etc.

Then the plan year, the calendar year for Medicare always resets on January 1st. So, as it pertains to your prescription benefit, you only, you, a Medicare beneficiary in your first year of being on Medicare, only have to pay 25% of the cost of your prescription medication until you reach a total medication amount of $2,500, at which point you then have to pay 100% of the cost of the medication. So, accordingly, if your birth month is January, then you're more likely to hit that $2,500 amount and then your out-of-pocket cost is going to go up to 100%.

Whereas, if your birth month is November, well then by December, you probably have not reached the $2,500 amount and so in December, you're still at the 25% coinsurance amount. So, what they said was, is okay, well let's look at people in Medicare who have birth months like January, February, March versus people that have birth months of like October, November, December and let's compare what their medication fill rate is. Do they fill their prescriptions? And then they said, okay, well if they're filling their prescriptions differently, what prescriptions are they filling differently? And they found that they're filling their cholesterol medications differently, they're found that their their high blood pressure medication was filled differently, they found that their diabetes medication was filled differently, in that if you started Medicare in like January, February, March and were more likely to hit this $2,500 and more likely to have to pay 100% out-of-pocket cost in December, then you were less likely to take those medications.

And then what was interesting is that they then said that they used machine learning algorithms to then predict the mortality based upon those medication changes. Now, I won't go into any more detail about it. I'll leave a link to the study in the show notes. Now, is that a good methodology? Is that a bad methodology? I don't know. But what I do know is that that methodology was not peer reviewed. Now, this study was not published in the largest medical journals in America, as it relates to healthcare, it was not published in the New England Journal of Medicine, it was not published in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

The Health Economics and Policy Research Journal is referred to as Health Affairs in America. They're all peer reviewed. The most famous science publications in the world are nature and science. They are peer reviewed. So it just begs the question, why did the authors choose to go this route with the National Bureau of Economic Research and not the peer reviewed route? Okay, now I also want to, so fine, so they decided to go that route. It's a free country, they can do what they want. I'm not blaming the NBER for publishing this.

I mean, maybe there is a place for non-peer reviewed research publications, but you got to take it with a grain of salt. It hasn't been examined by experts in the field. Okay, well, it wasn't this, you know, cost sharing kills people? Well, that's a pretty important study, right? This study was not reported on or picked up on by the New York Times, the Washington Post, the LA Times, the Wall Street Journal, and the only two like online art places that I found to pick up by Vox and Axios and then Becker's Hospital Review like just picked it up as well.

So like, again, this could be totally true. This study could be totally true. Okay, and maybe clustering is a horrible idea and maybe it does increase mortality. Okay, that might absolutely be true. But my point today is, is one, we don't know. Two, the study examining this was not peer reviewed. And three, it was put in fairly widely read online news sites without at least going through the rigor of peer review first. So you got to be careful. You got to read the details. And that holds true. And I think you probably all know that, but that's what I wanted to share today.

And thank you for watching a healthcare scene..

