Title: Summary of 16 Lessons - Healthcare Money Campfire Stories Audio Book_xG2E9Q09tg8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xG2E9Q09tg8
Language: en
Duration: 5:39
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Healthcare Money Campfire Stories by Eric Bricker, MD. Summary of 16 Lessons in the Business of Healing Lesson 1. Doctoring is a pyramid. Fighter-pilot specialists are on the top, and infantry primary care physicians are on the bottom. Implication. Changes in physician payment will affect the different specialties differently. Doctors are not a monolith. Lesson 2. Ill thoughts and ill families lead to ill bodies. Implication. Spending more money on ill bodies may not lead to health if a person still has ill thoughts and families.

Lesson 3. Physicians who teach medical students sacrifice income to train the next generation of doctors. Implication. Current pressure to maximize physician revenue today may lead to decreased instruction and expertise of future doctors. Lesson 4. The U.S. labor market for physicians, nurses, and other healthcare providers depends on foreign-born and foreign-trained people. Implication. Immigrants are a vital part of the U.S. healthcare system. Lesson 5. Money in healthcare has life and death consequences. Implication. The good and bad sides of capitalism are starkly juxtaposed in healthcare.

Lesson 6. Educational and social circumstances unique to the individual have a major impact on a person's disease and its treatment. This uniqueness in healthcare is what makes standardization or mass production in scale difficult to apply. Implication. Effective healthcare is patient-specific. Protocols can still be used, but they must take into account the realities of a patient's circumstances. Lesson 7. Hospitals take on risk, just like insurance companies. Implication. The insurance industry is regulated in terms of the amount of reserves each company must have.

The concept of regulated reserves could be applied to hospitals as well to control their current Robin Hood approach of overcharging commercial insurance to compensate for Medicare and Medicaid under payment. Lesson 8. The metaphysical world dominates the physical world. Implication. In healthcare, maybe our physical money challenges have metaphysical solutions. Lesson 9. Healthcare system navigation is a key component to solving healthcare financial challenges, both for individuals and employers. Implication. Historically, doctors and hospitals themselves have not provided the adequate services to navigate patients through their own system.

Likewise, insurance carriers have not provided the needed navigation services either. Employer-led healthcare navigation is a way to fill that gap. Lesson 10. In order for healthcare entrepreneurs and startups to succeed, they need employers to take on the risk of using their service. Implication. The perpetual high cost of employer-sponsored healthcare and health insurance could be due in part to the risk-averse nature of employers in this area of their operations. Lesson 11. Employers tend to make substantial changes in employee healthcare only when there is a crisis.

Lesson 12. Implication. A lack of change in employee healthcare and their health insurance vendors is to be expected in the absence of a crisis. Lesson 12. There are financial conflicts of interest in healthcare that are often hidden. Implication. Reducing conflicts of interest may be a key component to improving healthcare. Lesson 13. Many of the problems of healthcare quality and cost can be solved by matching a patient with the right doctor and team of providers at the right time. Implication. There are pockets of greatness within the U.S.

healthcare system. The key is to get the right people to those pockets at the right time. Lesson 14. Change in healthcare will be resisted by those people and organizations that benefit from the current system. Implication. Any cause for change by those people and organizations that already benefit from the current U.S. healthcare system should be met with skepticism. Lesson 15. The intermittent and emotionally charged nature of healthcare makes patients especially susceptible to exploitation. Implication. One of the values of an advocate in healthcare is their greater frequency and rationality with healthcare situations.

Lesson 16. Improving quality and cost effectiveness in healthcare creates value that can be translated into income for businesses and people. Implication. The future of a career in healthcare is bright if you can create real benefit to others. Epilogue. To learn more about healthcare finance, I have started a video journal called A Healthcare Z. It can be found at ahealthcarez.com. The journal has over 200 videos each about 4 to 7 minutes in length. Topics range from hospital and insurance contracting to pharmacy benefit managers to case studies of employers that have successfully increased healthcare quality and decreased healthcare costs.

You can subscribe to the A Healthcare Z video newsletter via a link on the page below..

