Title: Superior Diabetes Care with 1_ Shared Decision Making_ 2_ a Diabetes Checklist and 3_ Screenings_gazzgCfY-Z0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gazzgCfY-Z0
Language: en
Duration: 6:06
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Superior Diabetes Care. New year, new topic. Let's discuss the best ways to take care of one of the banes of existence for an employee health plan. Diabetes. Diabetes is a huge risk factor for heart attack and stroke. It's the number one cause of kidney failure and people needing to go on dialysis. It's the number one cause of blindness. It leads to neuropathy. It leads to amputations. It leads to non-healing of foot wounds. I mean, it's horrible.

I've seen all this personally, both in the outpatient setting and in the hospital. If there is anything that we can do to better treat the scourge of diabetes, then we should do it. Well, guess what? There's been a lot of research on that. And this particular study from the University of Minnesota Medical School that identified three systems of care that led to superior diabetes outcomes. And we're going to discuss those right now. System of care number one, shared decision making. Whoa! Imagine that in healthcare, a physician and a patient actually sharing a decision.

In other words, it's not the physician saying, oh, you've got to do this and you've got to do this. And the patient passively saying, okay, doctor, I'll do this and I'll do that. No, it needs to be a conversation. It needs to be collaborative. It needs to be a dialogue. And here's the key, according to the paper. It needs to identify reasonable management options for the individual. Now, I have had patients that had no transportation other than walking and the bus and the subway. Okay. I have patients who could not read.

So we had to do things like, hey, let's have your spouse who can read come with you to the appointments. Okay. For the person who couldn't walk, it was like, okay, guess what? They like couldn't get to the pharmacy. So guess what? They got all their medications from the clinic. Like we're like, hey, you need your medications? You're just going to get them from the clinic. That's what we're going to get. Okay. You have to talk about these very boring, pragmatic things in people's lives to effectively treat their diabetes.

If the doctor during a fast seven minute visit just says, you need to do this, you need to do this, you need to do this, you need to do this, and doesn't engage in a collaborative dialogue with the patient. It will fail. I've seen it happen myself. Now, number two, a diabetes care checklist. That's right. Just like the famous doctor, Artul Gawande, had his surgery checklist, a checklist for diabetes care is hugely effective. Relying on the physician's memory for what should and should not be done for a person with diabetes is a horrible approach.

There needs to be a checklist. It could be written. It could be in the EMR. It's the 21st century. Hello. Let's use a checklist. Now, hemoglobin A1C, which is the 90 day control of a person's blood sugar, needs to be checked periodically. A retina exam needs to be done by an ophthalmologist on an annual basis. The urine needs to be checked for protein to make sure that there's not nephropathy. Also, the kidney function, which can be tested by a blood test by creatinine, also needs to be checked as well. And there's other checks as well.

But the point is, is that people typically come in for sick visits. I would see this all the time. Hey, I've got sinusitis. Hey, I've got a rash. Hey, I've got a bladder infection. People don't really come in and be like, hey, you know, I really haven't had my nephropathy screened for with a serum creatinine recently. I don't think I've ever had a patient tell me that. So the doctor needs a checklist to remind them that during all of that sick visit stuff, oh, by the way, we got to take care of those silent chronic diseases.

And oh, by the way, it's the diabetes that's ultimately going to cause so much disability and suffering and potentially even death. And so it's the doctor's responsibility to stay on top of that with a checklist. Come on, this is not rocket science. Okay, number three, guideline-based screening. So believe it or not, the screenings outside of diabetes are hugely important for people with diabetes. What do I mean by that? The regular U.S. Preventive Services Task Force screenings for things like hypertension and high cholesterol.

Why? Because those are major risk factors for coronary artery disease, as is diabetes. So if you treat the person's diabetes and you neglect their hypertension and their high cholesterol, guess what? You're still allowing damage to the blood vessels of the heart to happen, and you need to stop it. So you got to stay on top of their hypertension and their high cholesterol. You also have to screen them for their depression. If a person has diabetes and is depressed, it's really hard for them to take care of themselves.

So you got to treat the depression. You got to screen them for cigarettes. Cigarettes are horrible for your blood vessels. It's not just bad for your lungs. Cigarette smoke is horrible for your blood vessels. So again, if you've got a diabetic and you're taking care of their diabetes, but you're neglecting the fact that they still smoke, you got to do something about that. You got to have a shared decision-making discussion around their smoking cessation. Now, alcohol abuse is also incredibly damaging for diabetics, and there's other screenings as well.

So, all of this underlines the point that just having a primary care physician is not magic. Okay? Somebody just like, quote-unquote, saying that I'm their primary care doc does not like magically cure them or effectively treat them for their diabetes. You got to do this stuff. There has to be a visit, and that visit has to involve shared decision-making. It has to involve a checklist. It has to involve screenings. Oh, by the way, especially during the pandemic, you can do so much of this virtually. Like, a lot of my patients, okay, we didn't have virtual care back when I saw patients in person.

Like, you had to come into the office. And guess what my patients did? They didn't come into the office. And guess what? I didn't do virtual visits with them, and they missed out on all this. So just imagine how much more effectively you could do all this virtually. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching..

