Title: Surgery Volume is Back and So is COVID... Are There Enough Hospital Beds___yJn4mN3EFfM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yJn4mN3EFfM
Language: en
Duration: 7:16
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is surgery volume is back and so is COVID. So it was recently reported by the Hospital Financial Management Association, the HFMA. They found that the late July surgery volume at hospitals was about equal to the January of 2020, in other words, before coronavirus hit America, surgery volume as well. And that was based upon a survey of 1,500 surgeons. Now, similarly, the Fitch Rating Agency also did a survey of hospitals. Now, why in the world would Fitch do this? They rate bonds.

They want to be able to know if hospitals will be able to pay their debt, their bonds back. That's why Fitch is interested in this. So look, they said that per their analysis, that surgery volume was at 89% of pre-COVID levels. So the point is, is that everyone knows, we've reported it here before, that elective surgery volume went way down in March and April because of the uncertainty and the initial presence of COVID in America. And then over the course of the late spring and summer, then much greater surgical volume then came back.

Okay, that's fine. However, here is the challenge with this fall and early winter, is that the third wave of COVID is now hitting America, where 77% of ICU beds are occupied as of December 4th. And that was the most recent day that was posted by the Department of Health and Human Services, which by the way, I will leave a link in the show notes to the Health and Human Services website that posts that occupancy data. And it's fascinating. It's fascinating on a number of levels. One, that's a nationwide number.

Okay, it was 71% occupancy in the ICU in early November. So essentially in a month, it went up by six percentage points or basically almost a 10% increase as this third third wave of COVID occurred. I will add, but that's only the average. We've talked before about bell shaped curves. That means that some hospitals are much greater than the 77% and some are less. And also that varies by day of the week or day as well, right? So the point is, is that it's highly variable on that website. It doesn't even have the information for all the states.

And that's one of the key points of today is that just the measurement around hospital capacity and specifically ICU capacity in America is really a black box. I mean, it is not transparent. Maybe somebody knows about it. If the Department of Health and Human Services knows about it, certainly they're not sharing it on that website. They don't even have close to all 50 states on there. And as previously reported on A Healthcare Z, Oregon was the only state that had statewide coordination of hospital bed and ICU capacity where they could shift patients around.

Depending on that, Oregon was the only state that did that. Okay. Now there was an NPR story that also found that 18% of hospitals nationwide were short staffed, which amounts to a thousand hospitals. Okay. So 18% is not greater than 50, right? So it's not the majority, but a thousand hospitals is still a lot of hospitals. Now, again, it's variable. In seven states, greater than 30% of the hospitals were short staffed. So again, you know, 18%, that's less than one in five. And here you have some that have greater than 30%.

But again, the NPR article says the same thing that I saw on that Department of Health and Human Services website, which is not all hospitals and states report their capacity. So again, it's a black box. This is just what's of known. It could be a lot better. It could be a lot worse. The point is we don't know. And you can't manage what you can't measure as everybody knows. Okay. So what is the specific capacity limitations of hospitals? So one is the space. I mean, literally from talking with my medical colleagues that still work in the hospital, there's just patients that are staying in the emergency room for 24 to 48 hours.

They're quote admitted. They're too sick to go home, but they are not up in a bed up on the floor. They might be on a gurney behind a curtain in the emergency room. And that presents a problem because then you don't have the typical floor nurses taking care of the patients in the ER. ER nurses are great, but they're great at seeing people in the ER. They're not great as sort of the typical care that a floor patient would receive. Now, that just gets to how these issues of staffing, it's very important that the staffing levels are of staffing of the correct skill.

So you can't just replace a nurse with any old nurse and you can't replace a doctor with any old doctor. Okay. Next up, the staffing issues can basically, in my opinion, be broken down by the floor versus the ICU. And this is where the challenge with the surgeries comes in because the surgical volume has been kept up. Then those surgical patients who need to have beds post-op for inpatient surgeries, let's say a lot of knees and hips, then they're going to be taken up floor beds that would typically be taken by these patients with COVID in the ER who can't come up.

Now, the entire hospital is not filled with COVID. So there are quite a few beds with elective surgeries that are potentially blocking the admission of a COVID patient. How frequently is that happening? Part of the point of this video is we don't know because we don't have insight about that. Okay. And then also for certain surgeries like these major scoliosis surgeries where they essentially like break almost the entire back and then sort of reset it in a straight direction. Listen, those surgeries, they go post-op to the ICU.

So there is ICU bed capacity that is being used by elective surgeries as well. Now, sure, do they need their scoliosis surgery at some point, but typically it is not an emergent surgery or even an urgent surgery. And finally, here's the point. The point is, is that it's highly variable because each hospital has to clinically and financially balance their own needs, their surgical needs. You know, people still need their cancer surgery, what have you, their financial needs, because those surgeries are much more highly reimbursed, especially by commercial players with the COVID need of the hospital resources for the literal space and for the staff.

And again, the point is that this is highly variable. This is like going to a restaurant on a Saturday night without a reservation. You don't know. Okay. You don't know. And so arguably, if you were sick with COVID, you would want to know what hospitals had capacity to get you into the ER and get you up to a bed. And we just don't have insight around that. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

