Title: The Key to Hospital Profitability is... Location._pXf8QrZrUbk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pXf8QrZrUbk
Language: en
Duration: 10:03
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is the key to hospital profitability is location. Now, in many ways, the hospital business is a service business like the restaurant business. And we all know the key to success in the restaurant business is location, location, location. Well, the same thing just might be true for hospitals as well. So let me start off with this story with a healthcare newsletter called Hospitality, which is published by Blake Madden and Workweek.

And let me tell you, it's fantastic. It's one of the newsletters that I subscribe to. I highly recommend it. I have no association. I know Blake because he lives in Dallas, but other than that, I have no association with Workweek or Hospitality. But Blake and Hospitality did a fantastic analysis of the profitability of hospital systems, including nonprofit hospital systems, in the first quarter of 2024. And they found that and he ranked them. Okay, so the hospital system with, or healthcare system with the highest profitability was Tenant at 14.6%.

Now, keep in mind, Tenant runs a ton of ambulatory surgery centers. They have some hospitals, but it's gobs of ambulatory surgery centers. Then HCA, Hospital Corporation of America, 13% profit margin, number two. Number three, Universal Health Services, UHS, which is 10.1%. So notice, the top three most profitable healthcare systems in America are for-profit healthcare systems, right? Tenant, HCA, UHS are all publicly traded companies. Now, next up, interestingly, is a nonprofit organization. Number four is Baylor, Scott & White, right here in Dallas-Fort Worth, and then down just north of the Austin area as well.

Their profitability for a nonprofit hospital system was at 8.7%. Shoot, that's close to the profitability of a for-profit hospital system. So other hospital systems were much lower or lower down on the list, but these were the top four. So what do these four have in common? Well, let's get to our location thing. Tenant, its state with the most facilities is Texas. It has 147 facilities in Texas. Its state with the second most facilities is Florida. It has 91 facilities in Florida. And then, okay, so let's compare it to other big states that have huge populations.

Okay, the most populous state in America, California, look at that, only 66. Look, Florida and Texas have smaller populations than California does, but Tenant only has 66 locations in California compared to the 147 and 91. In other words, Tenant is heavily slanted to Texas and Florida. And then, oh, by the way, this little state on the East Coast that I actually grew up in, called Maryland, they have 49 facilities in Maryland. Okay? Like, in Illinois, they only have like eight. Okay? So Maryland has a much smaller population than Illinois, but they've got 49 facilities in Maryland.

That's crazy. We'll get to why in a minute. Okay, next up, HCA. Again, Texas, 52 facilities. Two facilities, more facilities in Texas than any other state. Florida, 46 facilities. The second most numerous facilities are in Florida for HCA. Again, California, hugely populous state, only four facilities. Let's go to UHS. Texas, 23 facilities. UHS has more facilities in Texas than any other state. Florida, 22. California, again, huge population, only 16. Texas and Florida, more facilities for UHS than in California. Why is this? The key to profitability for hospital systems is two things.

It's high patient volume because hospitals have very high fixed costs. So you just have to run as many patients as you possibly can through that hospital to cover your fixed costs. And then two, and this is a very important term for everybody in healthcare finance to know, is a favorable payer mix. You have to know that term, payer mix. What in the world does that mean? That means the type of insurance that the patients have. And a favorable payer mix is one that has a lot of people with commercial insurance through their job.

In other words, these are working age people that have Blue Cross United, Cigna, Aetna, and they're either self-funded or fully insured. But remember, those commercial insurance rates are two, three, four, even 500% of Medicare rates. So the reimbursement for commercial insurance is much higher. So having a lot of commercially insured folks is a favorable payer mix. Okay. And then conversely, having a very low Medicaid population is good for your favorable payer mix because Medicaid pays even less than Medicare.

And then obviously you're uninsured. You don't want to have uninsured people either. Okay. So what does, so I'm like scratching my head. I'm like, Texas and Florida, what gives? Why would Texas and Florida? And of course, Baylor, Scott and White's located in Texas and then tenant HCA and UHS. Their highest numbers of facilities are in Texas and Florida. Well, I'm sure all of you know about the massive population growth in Texas and Florida. Okay. Texas, since 2022, so just in the past like two years, less than two years, has added 473,000 people to its population, more so than any other state.

Florida has added 365,000 people, the second most number of people of any state in America. Guess what the third state is? It's North Carolina. They added a measly 140,000 people and they're number three. Look, they're not even half as much as Florida. So Texas and Florida are these huge sponges for population, which contributes to that higher patient volume. One of the keys to high patient volume is having a lot of people and having a lot of people move to your state. So having a growing population is hugely important.

That's a great point for hospital profitability. And then number two, if you look on a map, I'll leave a link in the show notes in the map. If you look where the tenant HCA, UHS and Baylor Scott and White facilities are, they are in wealthy suburbs and wealthy urban locations within Texas and Florida. They're spread out evenly all over the state. They're in very wealthy places within the state. Specifically, they're in the wealthy suburbs of Dallas, Fort Worth, Houston, Austin, and San Antonio. Okay? They're not in like random East and West Texas towns.

They're in the suburbs of the major metropolitan areas that have people who have jobs that have fat commercial insurance policies. And again, in Florida, it's in Southeast Florida and the Tampa area and the Orlando area. Now, Maryland. What gives with Maryland? Aha! Did you know that Maryland is the second wealthiest state in America, just behind New Jersey? And it's barely behind New Jersey. Like, Maryland might as well be tied with New Jersey for the wealthiest state in America. The average house, the median household income in Maryland is $94,000.

And because I grew up in Maryland, listen, it's filled with government contractors. It's filled with lawyers. It's filled with lobbyists. It's filled with defense contractors. It's filled with all these other contractors that have contracts, massive contracts with the federal government. Maryland is essentially a bedroom community for Washington, D.C. Okay? So, huh, tenants smart. They're like, well, we're going to build gobs of ASCs in the suburbs of Washington, D.C. and Maryland because they're people with huge fat insurance policies in Maryland.

Okay. Now, so what's the point? Why am I telling you all this? You hear in the news about how hospitals are struggling. Okay. Healthcare is huge, right? It's over $4.5 trillion. Okay? Some hospitals are struggling. Okay? These hospitals are not. Not all hospitals are struggling. Okay. Are some hospitals struggling financially? Sure. Not all. Okay? Now, the hospitals that are not struggling financially are highly profitable in growing population centers with favorable payer mixes. So, if you have a hospital system and you have a shrinking population and you have an unfavorable payer mix, like maybe you should open a hospital in Dallas, Fort Worth, Houston, Austin, or San Antonio.

Like maybe you should just open a hospital in these locations because that's exactly what these hospital systems are doing. Maybe you should do that too. Okay. So, that's number one. One point is that healthcare markets are highly variable. Okay? Healthcare is not a monolith. So, just know that if you ever read a headline that says hospitals are blank, doctors are blank, insurance carriers are blank. Just know it depends. It's highly variable. And then point number two is that in Florida, by far and away the major payer is Medicare.

It's not commercial insurance. So, what gives? Why would all these hospitals that are so profitable have so many facilities in Florida? Aha! Well, a little birdie who is a retired executive from one of these facilities, one of these for-profit hospital systems, told me that they absolutely are profitable on Medicare patients. Now, certainly you can't make a profit on all diagnoses for all Medicare patients, but there are absolutely certain diagnoses and procedures for Medicare patients that these hospital systems specialize in with their ambulatory surgery centers, yada, yada, yada, so that they can still be highly profitable with Medicare as the primary payer in Florida because of all the retirees.

So, all those people who are like, you can't make any money off of Medicare. Aha! Listen, HCA tenant, UHS, not so much. They might disagree with you about that. So, that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

