Title: The Cost of Getting Paid... Doctor Billing and Collections on Healthcare Uncovered Episode 9_bvu9c2MtSF8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bvu9c2MtSF8
Language: en
Duration: 3:32
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Doctors, do you know how much you spend each year trying to get paid? Today I'm going to share with you what you need to do to make sure you're maximizing revenue and getting paid on time. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker and I'm also a healthcare finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially and that's why I've partnered with Nomi Health to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. Just simply getting paid by insurance companies is very expensive for doctors. A study in the Journal of the American Medical Association found that at one academic physician practice, billing and collections cost $99,000 per primary care doctor per year.

That's 14% of their total revenue, the equivalent of almost two months of work. But that's by no means a worst case scenario. Some specialties can spend close to 25% of their total revenue on insurance, billing and collections alone. But that's only part of the cost of billing and collecting from insurance companies. The other major category of cost is write-offs. Write-offs are uncollected payments from insurance companies that the practice never gets paid for. And so they write them off. Write-offs can be an additional 5 to 10% of revenue in many cases.

When you add write-offs to the cost of billing and collections, the total cost of just getting paid can be over a third of total revenue. That's four months of work for nothing. And I'm not even counting the time value of money for carrying the receivables on your books. The industry term for billing and collections is revenue cycle management or RCM. And I have seen this quagmire first-hand because before becoming a doctor, I used to be a revenue cycle management consultant. The process of billing and collecting is so complicated that it is just filled with errors.

Incorrect information collected from the patient. Wrong information entered into the billing software. And so on. A medical biller I recently spoke with said one practice had a drop-down list of 45 different insurance plans they had to choose from. And employees were constantly choosing the wrong plans. Billing and collections are essentially an endless game of non-payment whack-a-mole. Fix one error and two, three, or ten more immediately pop up. But doctors, there are alternatives. There are new direct contracting relationships with employers and governments completely outside the traditional health insurance system.

You can't switch all your revenue overnight, but there is a way to get started. One idea is to join a direct contract network like the Nomi Health Open Network. To learn more, check out the link in the video description to start a conversation with Nomi. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and this is Healthcare Uncovered, where we break down a broken system. Let's go to the trainants. Thanks for the telephone..

