Title: The Economics of Dialysis_ Gov_t Pays _35K_ Employers Pay _149K Per Year For the Same Service_gWGw_rvavuE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rvavuE
Language: en
Duration: 9:13
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is the economics of dialysis. Now if we work in healthcare we have to understand how the money flows in dialysis because it's incredibly expensive and it's really quirky as we're going to find out. Now 468,000 people in America are on dialysis for what is referred to as end stage renal disease. So kidney disease has different stages one through five and five is the end or the last stage. It's where the kidneys no longer function and you then need to have a machine essentially replace the function of the kidneys or get a transplant and that machine replacing the function of your kidneys is dialysis.

You got to go three days a week, typically it's Monday, Wednesday, Friday or Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday. You sit in a chair, they hook up your veins to the machine, it pulls out the blood, it cleans it out, it puts it back in. You got to sit there for like four hours, three days a week. Now I'm going to quickly go through the pathophysiology of why diabetes and hypertension cause kidney failure. And so what we have here is what's called a nephron and the nephron is the microscopic unit of the kidney because kidney doctors are called nephrologists, right? Dialysis doctors are nephrologists.

They study the nephron. Now an artery brings blood to the nephron and it then goes through a very delicate network or web of blood vessels that then allow fluid and electrolytes to pass out into the tube of the nephron which then drains into the ureter and into the bladder and then you urinate it out. Okay, well that structure there is referred to as the glomerulus and diabetes causes microvascular disease. It damages the very small delicate blood vessels of the body everywhere, including in the glomerulus.

So that process of microvascular disease stops the fluid and the electrolytes from passing through the way they normally should and the kidney no longer functions. Now that process of microvascular disease is the exact same process that happens in the heart and causes heart attacks for people with diabetes. It's the same process that happens in the brain and causes strokes for people with diabetes. So that's why diabetes causes end-stage renal disease and then they subsequently have to go on dialysis. Now 88% of people start out on hemodialysis and then over time it drops to about 64%.

So the majority of people are on hemodialysis. Now there is another type of dialysis that's called peritoneal dialysis where fluid is actually put into the abdomen through a small port and the person themselves can take out the fluid with a syringe and then put in new fluid and they can do that at home. They don't have to go into dialysis three days a week. It's very good. It's oftentimes used for people with kidney failure who live in rural locations where they would not be able to drive into a dialysis center three days a week.

And then finally there's a kidney transplant. You don't have to be on dialysis for the rest of your life. If you get a kidney transplant then you have the transplanted kidney work for you. It starts out as only 3% of people go straight from kidney failure to transplant but then over time as they're listed on the donor list it goes up to 29% that subsequently receive a kidney transplant. Now who are these people that are on dialysis in terms of their employment? Well only 24% of them are employed versus other people of the same age who are not on dialysis.

In other words most people. That's 85% of those people are employed. So what does that mean for an employer sponsored plan? That means that your plan members that are on dialysis are probably not employed. Probably not employed by you. It's probably an unemployed spouse or partner. That's probably who's on your plan who's on dialysis. Now Medicare actually pays for the majority of dialysis in America. Why is that? People become eligible for Medicare coverage after four months. So after you've been on dialysis for four months you can get on to Medicare.

But, and there's a big but, there is what is called a 30 month coordination period where if you have an employer sponsored commercial insurance plan, Medicare by their rule says that the commercial insurance has to be primary over Medicare for a period of 30 months. After that four months. So in other words for a total of 34 months if the person is on a, that's almost three years, if the person is on a commercially insured plan, commercial insurance is primary and only after the 34 months would Medicare then become primary.

Now why is that important? From a cost perspective Medicare only pays $248 per dialysis session which adds up to $35,000 per patient per year. Now commercial insurance cannot get as good of a deal with the dialysis companies as the government, right, because Medicare can essentially say it's going to pay whatever it wants to pay. So as a result commercial insurance reimburses dialysis at $1,041 on average per session which adds up to $149,000 per person per year. So $150,000 per year is going to show up in your high cost claimants.

So when you're looking through those folks and you see folks on dialysis, that's why. Now who is this money going to? The two major companies in the dialysis market are DaVita which is based in Denver, Colorado has $11.4 billion a year in revenue. They have just under 3,000 dialysis clinics across America. They control 37% of the dialysis market. Wow, over a third. And a little tidbit, Warren Buffett and Berkshire Hathaway own 32% of DaVita. They are the largest shareholders of DaVita. So in terms of like DaVita making healthcare costs higher and increasing their revenue, like Warren Buffett actually wants that to happen.

Okay, next up we have Fresenius which is actually a German company. They have very similar revenue in North America. It's $11.3 billion. They have just under 3,000 dialysis clinics very similar to DaVita. And they have 35% of the dialysis market. So you see here between DaVita and Fresenius they've got 72% of the dialysis market which is two companies. The third largest dialysis company only has 3% market share. So when it comes to dialysis there's the big two and then there's everybody else. Now, how in the world did a German company become so dominant in American dialysis? It's because Fresenius in 1996 bought a division of a company called National Medical Care which is based in Waltham, Massachusetts.

The Fresenius US headquarters is still there today. And that is how this German company started becoming so involved in US dialysis. It seemed kind of odd, but that's how it happened. Now, here is the kicker and I made an entire other A Healthcare Z video about this. I will leave a link to it in the show notes if you'd like to watch it. But the key here is where it gets really complicated for a commercially insured plan is this period between the four months where they become eligible for Medicare and the 30-month coordination period.

Now, if they're a spouse, on a lot of the employer plans, then the employee has to pay all the spousal premium. Or if the employee loses their job and they go on COBRA, then they have to pay all the premium both for themselves and for their spouse. And this is where, as you can imagine, Davida and Fresenius really want people to stay on commercial insurance. They do not want them to go on Medicare. And so through the National Kidney Fund, there is a charity that actually will pay the premium for people on dialysis.

And the LA Times did a fantastic investigative report because this was actually on the ballot in California where it turns out that Davida and Fresenius were involved in setting up this charity to get money donated to people so that they can stay on commercial insurance. Now, their commercial insurance premium might be 12,000 a year, 24,000 a year. Okay. I mean, it's a lot of money. So that's the charity's got to pay the 12 grand or the 24 grand a year. But that's still far less than the 149 that it's causing the commercial insurance plan to pay.

So essentially, if you could get them off, you know, if they, you know, left the company, you know, the employee got fired, etc. And you got them onto Medicare where commercial insurance was not primary, then Davida and Fresenius, they would lose a lot of money. Now, the patient and the employer would save a lot of money, right? Because you got to remember that there's co-insurance and all this other stuff that's going on here. But just know that there is a mechanism in place for charities to pay the premiums for people on dialysis so that the very high reimbursement rates by commercial insurance to Davida and Fresenius can continue.

And that is odd and that is quirky, but that's super important to know if we work in healthcare finance. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

