Title: Top 3 Health Plan Member and Patient Problems with Health Insurance_PfJmQaaFEHQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PfJmQaaFEHQ
Language: en
Duration: 7:08
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing the top three plan member problems and how to use those to create better plan member engagement. Okay, major problem number one are problem medical bills. They typically are in the form of denials, non-covered services, misadjudication where the carrier, the TPA actually has either not applied the discount correctly or has not applied benefits correctly, and a large bill from an out-of-network provider.

Now, what can HR benefits professionals do about this? Oftentimes, the broker benefit consultant, their account manager will be involved with it. So what can we do? One, in regards to denials, we can do appeals. There's first level appeals, which almost always will be denied. So you can just assume that if you do a first level appeal, it's going to be denied and you're going to want to move to a second level appeal. And if that is denied, you can even move to a third level appeal. So denials, at the end of the day, they try to follow medical policy.

Oftentimes, it's fairly subjective, so they deserve to go through the appeals process. Next, in regards to non-covered services, I would say setting expectations up front is super important, especially when it comes to things like, oh, gastric bypass surgery, Lasix. So just know that oftentimes after the fact, sometimes the damage is done, but it's best to set expectations up front in terms of what are some common non-covered services. Okay, next, in regards to misadjudication, follow up. Most of the carriers, as I've talked about in previous videos, are such large bureaucracies that for them to fix a misadjudication problem right the first time quickly, it's actually fairly rare.

And so you really need to follow up on it. So just assume that it's not going to happen and it's not going to happen quickly unless somebody follows up on it, right? So it needs to maybe be the plan member, it needs to be the account manager at the brokerage, it needs to be the broker, it needs to be somebody within HR who's the HIPAA privacy officer, etc. But it needs to be followed up on. Okay, next, in regards to the out-of-network providers, absolutely, they will negotiate on price and a payment plan.

And so it deserves to be negotiated. Again, at Compass, as a third-party concierge and advocacy service, we would do this all the time for our members. But regardless if it's the patients themselves, again, it needs to be negotiated because it can. Okay, next up, expensive prescriptions. Okay. Specialty pharmacy, obviously, is an incredibly expensive prescription. And we're talking here in terms of the members out-of-pocket costs. Next up, insulin. We've all seen in the news how much the cost of insulin has gone up over the years.

And then branded pill medications. Let's say, like, the new blood thinner medications are very expensive. And some diabetes pill medications can be very expensive as well. Okay, so here, what we're going to do is we're going to look into therapeutic alternatives. So here, oftentimes, the specialty and the branded medications, there is no direct generic available because it is still on patent. However, there are other medications either in the same class or that can treat the same condition, but in a totally different way.

And sort of one of the biggest examples of that is the pill, methotrexate, for something like rheumatoid arthritis instead of a specialty injection medication like Humira or Enbro. Now, methotrexate is not for everybody, but it literally is like $45 a month as opposed to $2,500 a month. Okay, next up, plan design when it comes to insulin. And we actually did this at Compass, where you want to do what's called value-based benefit design, where we actually made insulin much less expensive. Because we knew that if our members on our plan could not afford their insulin or just refuse to take it or spread it out too thin, that it would result in hospitalizations, ER visits, etc., that would end up being much more expensive.

So when it came to insulin, the plan actually ate the additional cost, but we found that in the long run, that ended up being much more cost effective. Okay, next up, number three is when a plan member is sick and needs help. And so, again, we would see this at Compass a lot, but this is where the employees, oftentimes, they'll go to HR or their benefits department, especially if they're self-funded, but even if they're not, they'll be like, Look, either the employee themselves or someone in their family, it's a new cancer diagnosis.

Or, oftentimes, it's an issue with a psychiatric illness, like depression or even like a suicide attempt. Or, oftentimes, substance abuse as well, whether it be like a teenager or a young adult dependent on the plan. And I was shocked at Compass at how common these were. And these are difficult areas, right, because in regards to psych and substance abuse, like, the coverage is actually pretty complex. And it's actually hard to weed through in terms of getting, like, inpatient days approved, etc. Okay, so the thing here is, again, at Compass, we would do this all the time.

And especially for an employer, if you're fully insured, you're probably not going to want to get involved in this directly. But if you're self-funded and you're the HIPAA privacy officer, it gives you more opportunity to be involved in this. But this is where a concierge or an advocacy service is hugely helpful in regards to helping these folks that are real sick and need assistance. Now, why is it so important to do this? Especially for HR and benefits of the employer itself, it's because you do not want to turf this to the broker or the carrier.

Obviously, you're going to have to work in partnership with the broker and the carrier in order to resolve a lot of these issues. But as HR and as the employer, we need to take ownership of this because this is an opportunity to develop a relationship. So we do not want to miss an opportunity to develop a relationship with the employee and that family member. Because guess what? Chances are, if they're going through it now, they're going to go through something again in the future. And we want to be involved in the future so we can help in the future.

The other reason is, is because what is the single best way to communicate through any company? It is by word of mouth. And by creating a remarkable health plan experience, by solving these problems for our employees, guess what the employees do? They talk about it. I mean, literally at Compass, we would have employees spontaneously raise their hand in open enrollment meetings and talked about how Compass had dramatically helped them or a family member. And guess what? What that employee said was probably the most memorable thing in the entire employee benefits meeting.

Not what anything that anybody from Compass said. Not anything that anybody else in the benefits meeting said. But the owner employee's testimony is so important in terms of creating engagement. So literally that wow factor of actually being able to solve that problem and take ownership of it. And even if you're fully insured and you can't get into the clinical details of it, what you can do is you can approach the employee and say, look, are you getting the help that you need? Don't tell me about what it is or what's going on, but are you getting the help that you need? And if the answer is no, then let me work with you to make sure you get the help that you need.

And by doing so, we can create, frankly, HR heroes. We can solve the top three plan member problems and we can really help boost engagement. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a healthcare Z..

