Title: Top 5 Challenges for Doctors_ Pre-COVID_Xg3nqH_9dwM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9dwM
Language: en
Duration: 3:05
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and welcome to A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing challenges for doctors. So this is based upon an article from the magazine Medical Economics from December 25th, 2016, so a little over two years ago, but I think the information is still relevant today, where they surveyed physicians and they asked them, what were your top challenges? And here were the top five. So number one, surviving reimbursement changes. So the way that doctors are being paid is mostly being changed by Medicare and that is costing them a great amount of stress.

Number two, time and energy required for pre-certification or what is also called prior authorization. So that typically is a requirement that comes from a health insurance company and the percentage of tests and procedures that actually require pre-certification or prior authorization has actually been going up, right? It was very high back in the 90s with managed care and then went way down and now it's slowly starting to come back up. And as a result, it's requiring physicians to spend more time and energy on it and it's causing them stress.

Number three, lack of negotiating power with the insurance company. So this is in regards to specifically things like their payment for office visits or surgery or procedures like upper endoscopies and colonoscopies. Number four, remain dedicated to medicine. So this is a major issue of physician burnout. And so within whether it be the New England Journal of Medicine or the Journal of the American Medical Association or various other publications, physician burnout is a major issue among healthcare professionals and doctors.

And then number five, maintenance of certification and money it takes. So the American Board of Internal Medicine, the A BIM, is what provides me as an internist with my maintenance of certification or my board certification. Likewise, there are boards for pediatrics and OBD, GYN, etc. And especially for internal medicine, that requirement is changing and that changing in that dramatically, dramatically changing. And those changes are causing stress and they're also very expensive. So what I want you to notice about these top five things is they are not specifically or directly related to patient care.

So in other words, on this list is not, hey, all of my patients are suffering from tuberculosis and I don't know how to treat them. It's not, hey, I don't know how to diagnose diabetes and I don't know what to do about it. Okay. So they're not specific patient care challenges. What they are related to, if you notice here, is about time and money and bureaucracy. And so it's important to know because these are the physicians that are taking care of your employees and their family members. And so to know that these are the challenges for them.

And so for you as an employer or for a plan sponsor, the issues of cost and quality are of great interest to you. No, those are not anywhere on the list for the actual physicians themselves. And that disconnect is a major problem with healthcare. We're not going to talk about how to solve that today, but I at least wanted to make you all aware of it. And thank you for watching a healthcare C..

