Title: Top 10 Selling US Drugs by Revenue_sitJ0VakPtg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sitJ0VakPtg
Language: en
Duration: 6:42
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Top 10 Selling US Drugs by Revenue. So of course one person's revenue is another person's expense. So if we're going to understand the great expense or cost of prescription drugs in America, it's helpful to look at it in terms of the revenue. In other words, if you're the maker of these drugs, you think about these drugs in terms of revenue. So let's examine the top 10 in terms of total US revenue. Number one, Humira at $13.7 billion in annual revenue made by AbbVie.

It's used by rheumatologists and gastroenterologists for things like rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic arthritis and then for things like Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. Next up we have Revlimid at $6.5 billion. This is made by Celgene and this is used to treat multiple myeloma which is a type of blood cancer, sort of similar to leukemia. So oncologists will prescribe this medication. Next up we have Eliquis at $5.6 billion made by Bristol-Myers Squibb in combination with Pfizer. It's typically prescribed by cardiologists.

This is a new type of blood thinner. Oftentimes people when they have something called AFib or atrial fibrillation, they can form clots in their heart and then those clots travel to the brain and they cause a stroke. So the blood needs to be thinned in order to prevent those clots from happening. And Eliquis is a new blood thinner where, which is a newer blood thinner, where unlike Coumadin or Warfarin, the patients don't have to get their blood thinness levels checked. They can just take the pill and know they won't get clots.

But it's expensive. Okay, next up we have Enbril at number four at $4.8 billion made by a combination of Amgen and Pfizer. Again, it's similar to Humira. It's used for rheumatologic illnesses such as rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic arthritis. Next we have Rituxan. This is an IV infusion, $4.2 billion in annual revenue made by Roche, used for a lot of different types of cancers. So it's prescribed by oncologists. It also can be used for rheumatoid arthritis. So rheumatologists will also prescribe it as well. Next up we have Optivo at $4.2 billion made by Bristol-Myers Squibb.

This is a cancer medication so it'll be prescribed by oncologists. Next up we have ILEA at $4.1 million made by Regeneron. Now this is an injection in the eye so it's done by ophthalmologists and it's used to treat wet macular degeneration and it can also be used for diabetic retinopathy. So as many of you know, diabetes actually can damage the retina or the back of the eye. And so this is a very frequent in-office injection that is done by the ophthalmologist. Next we have Nulasta at $3.9 billion made by Amgen and this is a shot that is prescribed by an oncologist because when people get chemotherapy it drops their immune system and their white blood cell count very low.

And so the Nulasta shot, what that does is that increases the white blood cell count so that people can fight off infections such as like a pneumonia as a result of the immune system being knocked down so much by their chemotherapy. Next we have Tivike at $3.8 billion made by GlaxoSmithKline. This is an HIV medication. And finally to round out the top 10 we have Remecade at $3.7 billion made by Johnson & Johnson. This is an infusion medication. It's sort of similar to Humira except it's an infusion. It's used to treat ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease and it can also be treat various rheumatologic illnesses as well.

Okay so billions of dollars. What was my point with going through all this is that we think about the high cost of health care in terms of things like hospitalization or surgery. Maybe we should think about the high cost of these specialty drug medications in a similar fashion in terms of what do we do about it. What do I mean by that? So centers of excellence have been well established and talked about on a Healthcare Z for things like drug replacements and spine surgery. But what about centers of excellence for things like oncology and rheumatology for the physicians that prescribe these medications? They're very expensive and if they should be used then they should be used.

But if they shouldn't be used then let's not use them. Not only are they expensive, they have side effects too. So maybe it would make sense for these to be given in a type of center of excellent type relationship. Because let me give you an example. So for all the oncologists that are prescribing all these expensive oncology medications, Walmart already has a center of excellence program at the Mayo Clinic for oncologists and they found that when their employees or their plan members went to the Mayo Clinic that there was a change in the treatment plan for their cancer 55% of the time.

What does that mean? That means that it's not exactly some rubber stamp rubric that every oncologist in America is following when they're prescribing anti-cancer medications. Okay so maybe there'll be situations where they weren't taking one of these and then the center of excellent patients would put them on or maybe there'll be situations where they weren't put on one of these and they were put on one of these and then they take them off. Who knows? But the point is is that if we're going to be dealing with such significant financial ramifications then we really need to have excellence in expertise around that decision making.

Okay next topic in regards to see a lot of rheumatologists up here. Okay believe it or not the American College of Rheumatology's recommendation or guideline for for these biologics that's what Humira and Enbrel are referred to as biologics is actually to use a pill called methotrexate oftentimes abbreviated MTX. Methotrexate only costs $50 a month. It's been around for forever. Now you have to monitor the blood for it. It has side effects as well but the point is and there's other medications that are referred to as DMARDs that are pills that can be used before you go to Humira or Enbrel or one of these other medications.

The point is is that the American College of Rheumatology itself has these guidelines. So the question becomes okay do we need to have rheumatologic centers of excellence around the utilization of these medications as well. I'm just saying that when it comes to these very expensive medications that are driving the majority of prescription drug costs in America we don't just have to sit back and passively say this is just the way it is. There are things that individuals and employers can do to address it.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

