Title: Traditional Medicare vs. Medicare Advantage Explained_cw4uB4KS-gU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cw4uB4KS-gU
Language: en
Duration: 3:38
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Doctors, do you really know what the key differences are between traditional Medicare and Medicare Advantage? Today I'm going to break it all down for you and make sure you understand these two very different healthcare programs. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker and I'm also a healthcare finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially and that's why I've partnered with Nomi Health to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. Doctors, Medicare Advantage is on the move. It has grown from less than 20% of the health insurance market for seniors to 50%.

Medicare Advantage is now equal in size to traditional Medicare, but it's not stopping there. Medicare Advantage is expected to be 70% of the total health insurance market by 2030. So it's really important that doctors know the difference between traditional Medicare and Medicare Advantage. Here are some basics. Traditional Medicare is fee for service where the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, CMS, sets the reimbursement for all services. As long as it is a covered service, the doctors just need to bill Medicare and Medicare will pay.

On the other hand, Medicare Advantage is different in that CMS gives a fixed amount per patient per month to a commercial health insurance company like Blue Cross, United, Cigna, Aetna, or other small health insurance companies. In Medicare Advantage, Medicare does not pay doctors directly. The health insurance company then negotiates fees with doctors, hospitals, and other healthcare providers to create a network. Now, this network is different than a health insurance company's other networks for people who are under 65 and are insured through their employer.

Think of Medicare Advantage as something of a hybrid between a traditional government program and commercial insurance. Now, here's where you want to pay attention. The Medicare Advantage network only pays about 95 to 105% of what traditional Medicare pays, so it's essentially the same payment amount as Medicare. Conversely, the other insurance networks for people under 65 typically pay much more. As a result, some doctors and hospitals may not agree to participate in Medicare Advantage and instead only agree to the networks for people under 65.

For doctors and hospitals that do agree to Medicare Advantage, there are often prior authorization and referral requirements for medications, tests, procedures, and specialist visits. This is a major difference between Medicare Advantage and traditional Medicare because traditional Medicare does not have prior authorizations or referral requirements to see specialists. And given that prior authorizations and referrals are a major burden for doctors and their staffs, Medicare Advantage plans can be seen as having disadvantages for doctors.

There are other differences as well, but I just wanted to hit the highlights. So in summary, Medicare Advantage is health insurance for seniors. It's an alternative to traditional Medicare. It's growing in popularity. It pays doctors about the same as traditional Medicare, but it has prior authorization and referral requirements that doctors generally don't like. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker and this is Healthcare Uncovered where we break down a broken system..

