Title: UHG Government Relations Strategic Superiority_uddMxHQp-yI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uddMxHQp-yI
Language: en
Duration: 4:56
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is CBS, Cigna and Anthem Strategic Whole. Specifically in their executive teams. Now what am I talking about here? I'm talking about government affairs. And in the world of government affairs, when it comes to the executive teams of the largest health insurance companies in America, United Health Group wins by a long shot. What do I mean by that? United Health Group wins because of Corey Alexander. Now Corey Alexander is the man.

Now who is Corey Alexander? He is the executive vice president for corporate affairs. He's on the executive team for United Health Group, the office of the CEO. Now, okay, corporate affairs, what in the world does that mean? It says external affairs underneath that. What in the world does external affairs mean? That's kind of another, it involves bodies a whole bunch of stuff, but it's another way of saying government relations. Aha, the government. So what does Corey Alexander have to do with the government? Well, first of all, let's talk about how much money United Health Group spends on lobbying.

So in 2020, they spent $4.1 million in lobbying. Their biggest year, understandably so, was in 2009 when they spent $5.8 million in lobbying as the ACA was getting debated, yada, yada, yada. And then since then, they've spent about $3.6 million about every year on lobbying, okay? But it's not just the money. It's specifically Mr. Corey Alexander. Why do I say that? Because Corey Alexander used to be the chief of staff for Steny Hoyer, a Democratic congressman from Maryland. Now, listen, I grew up in Maryland, okay? I don't know Congressman Hoyer, but let's just talk about Steny Hoyer here for a minute.

Okay, he's the House Majority Leader. He is the highest ranking Democrat in Congress after Nancy Pelosi, okay? He is serving his 20th term. His congressional district is kind of just south of Washington, D.C. St. Mary's County, Maryland, yada, yada, yada. Okay, he's serving his 20th term, okay? He's been there since 1981. He's been there for 40 years, okay? I will tell you, you do not mess with Steny Hoyer, all right? He may not be a household name with a lot of people, but I will tell you, do not mess with him, and Corey Alexander used to be his chief of staff.

But wait, there's more. Corey Alexander's family is family friends with Steny Hoyer. Corey Alexander's dad was a Maryland state lobbyist in Annapolis back when Steny Hoyer used to work in the Maryland legislature. And guess what? Their families used to vacation together in Nantucket. So literally, when Corey Alexander was a little boy, he was running around Nantucket with Steny Hoyer. I mean, if there's anybody that you want to be your head of government relations, it's going to be Corey Alexander. Like I said, he's the man.

Now, obviously, it's not just his family. I'm sure he's a very capable person in his own right. But let's compare this to the other insurance carriers and their quote-unquote strategic hold that I talk about. Okay, CVS, their government affairs guy, he's been working in pharma his entire career. Cigna's head corporate affairs person, been working at corporate, excuse me, government affairs person, been working at corporate America her whole career at Lincoln Financial, Johnson & Johnson, etc. Okay, the person at Anthem was the head government affairs person at HCSC, Healthcare Services Corporation, which is the Blue Cross of Illinois, Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, blah, blah, blah.

So it's a really big Blue Cross plan. And so Anthem's an even bigger Blue Cross plan. So they just hired the head government person from one Blue Cross plan to another Blue Cross plan. Okay, if you were like picking people to be on your basketball team, like, I would just say, you'd probably pick Corey Alexander. That's who you would pick. Okay? Now, why is this so important? 60% of health, of the largest health insurance carriers revenues comes from Medicare and Medicaid. It's from the government. And as I pointed out in a previous A Health Care C video, the profit margin on a government paid for member is twice as high as a commercial private insurance member.

So not only is it their largest group of business, but it is their most profitable book of business. So you better believe you're going to take care of the goose that's laying the golden eggs. So what's my point for today is that when it comes to government affairs, I think UHC wins. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Health Care C..

