Title: Unions in Healthcare_sHjXHQP9UB0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sHjXHQP9UB0
Language: en
Duration: 9:21
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is unions in healthcare. Now I can guarantee you I'm going to get into trouble today because no matter what I say, people are not going to like it. But that's okay. If we're going to talk about healthcare finance, we have to talk about unions in healthcare. So there are a variety of healthcare workers that are unionized. So a lot of the medical technicians and the phlebotomists in the hospital are unionized. Nurses are unionized.

About 20% of nurses nationwide are in unions. There's even physicians that are unionized. They are in California. There's not a lot of them. But yes, even doctors are unionized as well. So the ability for healthcare workers and specifically nurses to unionize was relatively recent. So it was in a 1974 amendment to the National Labor Relations Act, which goes back to President FDR. That's when all the initial sort of union rights sort of came along. And for reasons that we're going to talk about with the implications of striking, they didn't want healthcare workers involved with that.

But this change occurred in 1974. And as a result, the number of healthcare workers in unions has grown and it actually continues to grow. So there's about 14 million people nationwide in unions. About 7 million are in public employee unions and about 7 million are in private employee unions. And overall, the numbers of folks in unions have been treated. But the number of folks in healthcare units has actually been growing. Not a ton, but it's been growing. Okay. What do they ask for? They ask for things like increased wages or wage security benefits, especially health insurance or healthcare for themselves.

It has to do with their workloads. And not only workloads for the sake of work, but also just workloads as a patient safety issue. In other words, sometimes they would have agreements around, okay, what was the maximum sort of nurse to patient ratio that would be allowed? Not only for the safety of the patient, but also actually with COVID, there has been an increased demand or desire to unionize. Because of things like PPE, protective equipment, right, for the safety of the healthcare workers themselves.

They are asking, you know, they were asked to, you know, go without PPE or without, you know, N95 masks, etc. And so through collective bargaining, trying to have a better situation around that. Okay. Now, what are the four largest unions when it comes to nurses and healthcare workers in America? Number one is the SEIU, the Service Employees International Union on the East. That has obviously many different industries represented, but they have the largest number of healthcare workers in it. Number two is the National Nurses United.

Number three is the AFL-CIO, which of course, again, has many, many different industries, but includes healthcare workers as part of it. And the third one is the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union. Okay. So, now this gets to the highly controversial part, because if you join a union, then you sort of mentally and physically and emotionally have to prepare yourself to strike. Because that is what provides the collective bargaining leverage to go to the employer, whether it be the hospital, etc.

To ask for the wages and the benefits and the workloads and the safety requirements, etc., etc. Now, that brings up huge implications for patient care. Because striking means essentially, okay, you've got Joe and Jane sick in the hospital and I'm not going to show up to work. Okay. Well, what are the implications of not showing up to work for patient care? Okay. And to a certain extent, the flip side of the coin is the hospital administrators, they know this. And for like all of the, whether they're unionized or not unionized, healthcare workers, whether they be med techs or phlebotomists or nurses or doctors, the administration can be like, you know, we're going to not give you good wages or benefits, or we're not going to give you safe workloads, or maybe we're not going to provide a safe work environment.

What are you going to do? Are you going to strike? Are you going to literally desert Joe and Jane patient here in the hospital? You're going to abandon them? And so to a certain extent, this issue of patient care is potentially, you know, on one side of the issue, it might say that's exploited by the administration. On the other side of the issue, you might say that, you know, it's immoral or unethical for a healthcare worker to strike because it could literally kill people. And they've actually done studies on this.

And this one particular study, again, it's just one study, found that there was a 19.4% increase in hospital mortality during a nurse's strike. And there was a, during nurse's strikes, they looked at like 34,000 patients. And then there was a 6.5% increase in the readmission rates, again, during the strike. And they looked at the, the, the care before the strike. They looked at the care after the strike. And they're like, no, it was just during the strike was when this happened. Now, also interestingly, they also looked at hospitals that found like replacement nurses versus that didn't find replacement nurses.

And interestingly, they found that it didn't really matter in terms of that mortality. So, you know, you would, you would think that if you had replacement nurses, that that would help. But apparently it didn't. Okay, so, but the flip side of the issue is, okay, well, hospitals that are unionized, where the nurses have like, look, you know, we're, we're, you know, advocating for safer workloads, so that we're not taking care of as many patients, and so it's safer for the patients, etc. That they have, there's evidence to show that they have lower, those hospitals with unionized nurses have lower hospital acquired infections, and that overall, over time, they actually have lower readmission rates because the nurses are able to do a better job with their patients because they're not spread so thin over such a large number.

Okay, so it's kind of both sides of the argument. I'm trying to be fair and objective here. Okay, now, of all the physicians that probably would want to be unionized, it would be the interns and the residents, right, because they're the ones who work the longest hours, they're given the longest patient, largest patient loads, etc., etc. And so, for actually quite a long time, there is a union for some, a very limited number, but for some, interns and residents, and it's called the Committee of Interns and Residents, the CIR for short.

It's part of the SEIU, and it represents, and typically they're called house staff because they kind of live at the hospital, that's why they're called residents. They don't literally live at the hospital, but they spend so much time there, that's why they have that name. It's about 17,000 interns and residents across the country in California, Florida, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, New Mexico, and Washington, D.C. I did my medical training in Illinois and Maryland, so I never even knew there was a union for residents.

I can tell you that there were absolutely times where I felt like I was being taken advantage of. I think, like, most residents would probably say that. I can tell you just as a nurse, so my wife's a nurse, was a nurse in Maryland, and so she's not unionized there, and they had, and it was in Baltimore at Johns Hopkins Hospital, and they had a huge winter storm one time in Baltimore where they didn't have very good snow removal, and so, like, the nurses that were supposed to come on shift, they couldn't get to the hospital.

Now, while this snowstorm was happening, my wife was on her shift at the hospital. Okay, my wife and her team of nurses could not go home for three days, so they split themselves up between day shift and night shift, and they would do 12 on and 12 off, and if they weren't working, they literally slept in the hospital, and they did this for three days, and during Hurricane Harvey down in Houston, there's many stories of doctors and nurses and all the other employees at the hospital. So they were there for, like, over a week because they were literally flooded.

They couldn't get in. They couldn't get out. And so, like, and, you know, my wife was in her 20s, and, you know, she didn't have a family, and so, like, she kind of looks back at this as, like, oh, that was crazy, but you could imagine if you had, like, kids or if you had, like, you know, elderly relatives that you were, like, taking care of, you know, there were, like, huge ramifications if you were, like, stuck at the hospital for three days. So the question becomes, okay, well, what sort of, like, bad snowstorms and poor snow removal in Baltimore have happened before? It's not like the first time it's ever happened.

It's not the first rodeo. Like, the hospital hadn't necessarily gone through, like, the precautions of, like, what to do in case, like, they knew the weather was coming. They could have done something to maybe have more nursing coverage, et cetera. But the point is, is that potentially when you have environments where you don't have unionizations, you're essentially, whether it be through, like, your own conscience or what have you, you're like, look, I'm dedicated to my patients, and I'm going to do whatever it takes, regardless if you're a med tech or a phlebotomist or a nurse or a doctor or whatever, and that could potentially set you up to be exploited from a wage, benefits, workload, safety perspective.

So, like I said, no matter what I say, I'm going to, like, upset people, but that's okay. We don't shy away from difficult topics here on A Healthcare Z, but I wanted to bring up unions in healthcare and some important issues related to them, and that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

