Title: UnitedHealth Group is a _497B Giant... Larger Than Its 5 Closest Competitors Combined__vFCAsxEx5w
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vFCAsxEx5w
Language: en
Duration: 5:30
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is UnitedHealth Group dwarfs all other healthcare companies. Why is that? So, as many of you know, UnitedHealth Group's market capitalization is $497 billion. That's right, it's almost half a trillion dollars. Now let's compare that to $406 billion. What's $406 billion? That's the market capitalization of Elevance, CVS, Cigna, Humana, and Centene combined. That's right, United's value as a company is larger than all of its competitors combined.

So United is gargantuan. We know this, this is not new news. Then the question becomes why? Why is United gargantuan? And the reason is, in my opinion, because of Stephen Hemsley. And Stephen Hemsley was the CEO of United from 2006 to 2017 and then he became the chairman of the board. And he is the chairman of the board to this day. Now, he took over as chairman of the board from a gentleman by the name of Richard T. Burke who was the founder of United and was involved with United for a very long time until just recently.

And I'll leave a link in the show notes to my video on Richard T. Burke, the founder of UnitedHealthcare as well. Now, Stephen Hemsley before he became the CEO, he was the COO from 1998 to 2006. And then before that he was the CFO of Arthur Anderson where he had worked for 23 years. That's right. Stephen Hemsley is an accountant. He came from the accounting world to the healthcare world. Now, there is a video on YouTube from 2013 where Stephen Hemsley gives a presentation. And the way that he speaks is very interesting.

So Stephen Hemsley has an incredibly meticulous appearance. His hair is perfectly shorn. His tie is perfectly straight. He has a very square jawline that is devoid of fat. So you can tell he's very meticulous about his diet and his exercise. He knows the numbers of his business cold. He doesn't have to look at his notes. And it just shows that, listen, as the COO and then the CEO and then the chairman of the board, like some people are sort of, you know, often an ivory tower where we're in these positions of leadership.

But he is super detailed into the weeds. And he knows the business cold, which really shows, again, he's meticulous about his knowledge of the business. Like he's meticulous about his appearance. Okay. He has incredibly precise diction. And you can often tell how a person thinks by how they talk. And so he's probably a very precise methodical thinker because of his precise methodical speech that he has. Again, and he's not talking off the notes. He's just, he's sort of almost extemporaneously speaking. And you can see this happen.

Okay. He also has a very flat affect, which means that he doesn't show any emotion when he speaks. And then he's incredibly dispassionate when he talks as well. You know, health care, unfortunately, it involves people dying and suffering. And frankly, it involves a lot of people lying in bed covered with urine and feces. Okay. That's what health care is. Okay. And believe me, what he talked about is not that. So he's incredibly separated in terms of what he's talking about vis-a-vis what health care really is. Okay. Now, so he's hyper-rational and hyper-rational people tend to lack empathy.

I can't say that for sure about him, but in general, people who are hyper-rational lack empathy. All right. Who are some other hyper-rational, hugely successful people that have driven the success of their organizations? Bill Gates, Jeff Bezos, Mark Zuckerberg, and Elon Musk. And guess what? When I'm watching this speech by Stephen Hemsley, he sounds exactly like these guys. And so I think the key driving difference that makes United different from all these other organizations is really two things. One, Stephen Hemsley oversaw the creation of Optum in 2011.

So that was really a business model innovation where United is both on the supply and the demand side of health care. So in other words, they win kind of no matter what. But you can't just have the business model innovation. You also need to have relentless execution. And you can tell by Stephen Hemsley that he is the top of the food chain when it comes to the relentlessness at United. Just like Gates and Bezos and Zuckerberg and Musk were the top of the food chain with their relentlessness at their individual organizations.

And you can't have a wildly successful organization without relentlessness at the top. Because it's the relentlessness at the top that then drives the relentlessness throughout the culture of the organization. I would argue that United has a culture of relentlessness that is superior to their competitions. So when you combine their business model innovation of Optum with their relentlessness, you end up with a market capitalization that is larger than all your competition combined. But there is a warning.

And that is, what else is relentless? Sharks are relentless. Sharks are relentless in their eating. Highly successful. But like most animals and people and organizations, your greatest strength is also your greatest weakness. And so what happens to sharks? Well, as a result of their success in their eating, they have a bad reputation and they end up being hunted. And so the question becomes, what will happen to United? I don't know. But that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

