Title: United Health Group Owns 6_500 Doctors_ Calls It _Harmony Network__vU9nyVhMe40
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vU9nyVhMe40
Language: en
Duration: 5:41
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is United Health Group owned doctors called Harmony and Cheap Debt. Now what am I talking about here? So as many of you are well aware, United Health Group now owns many physician practices in Southern California. Now they have put those physician practices together and they have called it the Signature Value Harmony HMO Network. It's available in the marketplace, employers can sign up for it as of the end of 2019. So in 2020, this year, people are on this plan and the doctors are actually work for Optum, the Optum side of the United Health Group business.

Now in Southern California, they have 6,500 doctors that United Health Group now employs, right? So it's almost like a mini Kaiser, right? Where United Health Group is taking on premium and bearing risk and they're providing the care as well. So the providers of the care are the same group as the holders of the risk. Okay. Now, those 6,500 doctors are associated with 133 hospitals. So it's a lot of doctors and a lot of hospitals in Southern California, which has a lot of people. This is a real deal. Okay. Some of the names of those physician groups are healthcare partners.

It's not even called healthcare partners anymore. After they bought the group, they changed the name. Now it's Optum. You go to the Optum doctor there now. Monarch, AppleCare. AppleCare still kept its name, but it says affiliated with OptumCare. And then there's other physician groups as well. So now United Health Group and Optum, they own these doctors. They're employees. Now, the HMO plan design that I found online, I'll leave a link to it in the show notes, pretty, what you would probably imagine, right? It has a $0 deductible.

In order to have benefits, you have to go to one of their in-network providers. It's a copay plan. $20 copays for PCP visits. Works its way up to, it's a $500 copay for a maximum of four days for a hospitalization. It's pretty low dollar copays for things like imaging and lab. They also have telemedicine as well. So you can talk to a doctor on the phone. They've got a concierge that coordinates everything for you. Now they've got 35,000 members signed up for this Signature Value Harmony HMO in Southern California.

And they are proclaiming that they're able to offer this HMO plan at 20% lower premiums than the competitor HMO plans, which are folks like Kaiser in California. Now, interestingly, this is only the beginning. So United is planning on expanding to, interestingly, Texas, where A Healthcare Z is located, and Seattle are the next places that they plan to expand to. Now, here's where the cheap debt comes in. Now, because of the recession associated with coronavirus, the Federal Reserve has lowered interest rates to zero.

And the Fed has come out and said, look, we're going to leave interest rates at zero for a very long time. Now, what does that mean? That means that not only has UnitedHealth Group had record profits, but they can now raise an inconceivably large amount of debt for next to nothing. It's incredibly cheaper than their borrowing costs are incredibly low. How does that pertain to the Harmony Network? Well, you have this cheap debt in a setting of physician practices that have seen their revenue go down because of coronavirus.

So what's happening in physician practices across America is they're getting multiple offers, whether it be from private equity groups or from large insurance companies like UnitedHealth to themselves to buy the practices. And those practices might be more willing to sell because they're not bringing in as much revenue because of the coronavirus. So you've got the practices more willing to sell, plus you have United with more money. So they might be able to offer to increase the bid price for those physician practices.

And the physician practice would then sell out to Optum. Now, who's ultimately in charge of that decision? It's the older practice partners. Many of these physician groups are practices that the physicians own themselves. Now, typically you don't become an owner until after you've been in the practice for a certain number of years. And sometimes your amount of ownership is also based upon how many years you've been there. So the more most senior physicians, the ones who might be near their retirement, are oftentimes the ones who have the most control in the practice.

So whether you're an old partner or a young partner, regardless, as a partner, you are then faced with the choice of a practice with decreasing revenue and a very large check from UnitedHealthcare to sell your practice or continuing to struggle through with lower revenue and saying no to that large check from United. So, and obviously, United had to have a ton of physicians in Southern California. 6,500 physicians is a lot of physicians. So you have to have a lot of physicians in Texas, a lot of physicians in Seattle.

So in my opinion, the success of this Harmony Network really hinges upon the older physicians in these practices and their decision of whether or not they are going to sell out. And that's the point I wanted to make today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

