Title: UnitedHealth Group CEO David Wichmann Steps Down... The Whole Story Seems Odd_Z8-EFDENHrw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z8-EFDENHrw
Language: en
Duration: 7:10
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is United Health Group's CEO steps down. And frankly, the whole story is kind of weird. Okay, so what am I talking about here? So David Wichman is the CEO of United Health Group and he announced his retirement on February 4th of 2021. So just a few days ago, kind of seems totally out of the blue. He said the reason is that coronavirus has made him realize that he wants to spend more time with his family. Now, listen, I just hope that, listen, David Wichman's doing okay, I hope his family's doing okay, I hope they're all in good health.

I wish no ill will on Mr. Wichman. And then he's going to transition out of the position of CEO through the end of March. And then that's it. He's not going to be on the board. He's done. So who's taking his place is Sir Andrew Witte is going to become the new CEO of United Health Group. Yes, Sir Andrew. He is, he's British. He's from the UK. And yes, he is a knight. So this, this might be the first time that a British knight has been the CEO of one of the largest American companies and the largest health insurance company in America.

Now, he is the former CEO of the major British pharmaceutical company, GSK, GlaxoSmithKline. And this is, you know, the story here is kind of, kind of interesting. So, um, so he actually retired from GlaxoSmithKline in 2017 after being their CEO. So he, he retired, but the same year he retired, he joined the United Health Group board. And then he left the United Health Group board to become the head of Optum, right? Which is the huge healthcare services, essentially half of United Health Group's business, right? And Health Group is United Health Insurance and Optum together make United Health Group.

So he ran up, so he left the board to then run Optum. But then with COVID, he then took a leave of absence from Optum to join the World Health Organization to help with their COVID vaccine efforts. And the COVID vaccine is, I mean, it's made by AstraZeneca. It's not even made by GSK. So, okay. So he's, he's relatively new to United Health Group. Like he's from a pharmaceutical company. His only job previously has been at GSK. That's where he started as a management intern. So here you have a pharmaceutical CEO who now is the CEO of the largest health insurance company in America.

Okay. Now, keep in mind, while he was at GSK, GSK had a $3 billion fine from the United States government for a doctor bribery scandals, where they were essentially bribing doctors to prescribe their medications. And it goes even further than that, China even had an investigation into GSK for some nefarious, alleged nefarious practices over there. And like all that aside, GSK's earnings were down 15% the year that he left. And there were calls to break up GSK because they thought it wasn't doing very well.

They thought it would be better if it was broken up. So when Sir Andrew Whitty left GSK, like it wasn't doing that great. So like, again, that's just, it's kind of a unique background to be coming in to become CEO of United Health Group. Okay. So let's look at the transition that happened before. So the previous United Health Group transition, that was when Steve Hemsley was the CEO of United Health Group. And then he transitioned to David Wittman. Okay. In 2017. Okay. And Steve Hemsley was the CEO of United Health Group from 2006 to 2017.

Okay. That's nine years. Okay. David Wittman has been the CEO of United Health Group for like a little over three years, like less than four years. Right. So Steve Hemsley had a much longer time than he was the CEO. And David Wittman has been at United Health Group for 24 years. So he'd been at United Health Group for like 20 years before becoming the CEO. Sir Andrew Wittman has only been there since 2018, like barely over two years. Okay. So keep in mind that Steve Hemsley is still the chairman of the board of United Health Group.

And when he left being the CEO and handed the reins over to David Wittman in 2017, like Richard T. Burke, who is the founder of United Health Group, like moved from being the chairman of the board to being still on the board, being an independent board of trainers. So Richard T. Burke, the founder of United Health Group is still on the board. So keep that in mind that we're throwing all these names around. But at the end of the day, the eldest statesman is still around. And that eldest statesman is Richard T.

Burke. Now, if you look at the press release from when Steve Hemsley was passing the reins onto David Wittman, then Richard T. Burke himself is quoted in this press release. And he said, look, this transition of CEOs from Hemsley to Wittman was four years in the planning, four years in the planning. Okay. Four years is longer than Andrew Wittman has been at United Health Group, period. Okay. And that they had been preparing David Wittman for many years prior to this. Steve Hemsley came from Arthur Anderson. He hired David Wittman from Arthur Anderson.

So here you have a very sort of measured, stable, planned transition. The previous time they changed CEOs, this does not appear to be like that. This appears to be very different. Now, we live in unique times. So Jeff Bezos has said that he is leaving as the CEO of Amazon, the second largest company in America with $280 billion in revenue. Okay. Larry Merlot, three days after the election on November 6th, announced that he was retiring from CVS, which is larger than United Health Group. They make $257 billion a year.

And now United Health Group, which makes $242 billion a year, they have their CEO leaving. Now, this might be a coincidence. I don't know if three of the 10 largest companies in America just happen to be changing their CEOs the same time that we have a, you know, big change in political power in Washington, D.C. I don't know if that's a coincidence or not. I have no idea. All I know is that this change of power at United Health Group just seems odd. The story is unique. And it's a story that's important. This is the largest health insurance company in America.

The job of the CEO of United Health Group is arguably one of the most powerful jobs in all of healthcare in America. So if we work in healthcare, we need to take a look at this. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

