Title: University Hospitals_ Medicare Breakeven Plan - A Model for America_oEHrYViTtE4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oEHrYViTtE4
Language: en
Duration: 9:18
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is hospital to break even on Medicare. What does that mean to break even on Medicare? That means that the hospital system I'm about to talk about intends for its costs to be so low that the reimbursement from Medicare is enough to pay for it. Now what hospital system is this? It's the University Hospitals in Cleveland. Now, it's a very well-known hospital system. It's a little bit in the shadow of the Cleveland Clinic, but it's a behemoth in its own right.

It's an 18-hospital system in Northeast Ohio. If the University Hospitals were in another town, it would be like, you know, it's huge. Like I said, it is an incredibly meaningful hospital system. Now, they, like many other hospital systems across America, had a $185 million loss during the first eight months of 2022, with the fall in patient volumes after COVID and the tremendous increase in labor costs that hospitals across America have all faced. Now, as a result, they had two under or low utilized hospitals that they ended up having to shut down.

But interestingly, they shut down the inpatient and the surgery in the ER. But interestingly, at one of the hospitals, they kept the inpatient behavioral health unit open. And that's super important because almost all behavioral health units for hospitals, they lose money. But the University Hospitals said, look, we are still going to keep the behavioral health unit of this hospital open. Listen, and listen, I will tell you that inpatient psychiatric care is near and dear to my heart. I had a fantastic psychiatric rotation where, frankly, taking care of these folks with, you know, severe schizophrenia and people who are suicidal and homicidal.

I mean, they need to be taken care of in an inpatient setting. And it's super hard to come by inpatient psychiatric care. And here, University Hospitals are maintaining their inpatient psychiatric care. So, listen, hats off to them for doing that. Now, what have they done to address this Medicare break even? They did an administrative reduction in force. Of course, many of you know what that is, but for those of you who don't, a RIF is layoffs. So what did they do? They laid off 117 administrative full-time equivalents, FTEs, people with jobs.

117 people got laid off. And there was a total of 450 positions that were eliminated. So a lot of them were budgeted, but they weren't filled. And they decreased their cost by $250 million a year by the end of 2023. Now, they must have done more than just cut these FTEs. Because if you take the 250 million and divide it by the 450, then you're talking like half a million dollars in FTE. And obviously half a million dollars per FTE is like, it's way more than the actual FTE cost them. So they were obviously doing cost cutting in other places as well.

But of note, as part of this Medicare break even strategy of reducing their overall cost structure, it was solely administrative. They didn't increase their clinical staff at all in 2023 when they made these reductions. And they are still hiring for clinical positions today. So all patient care facing positions were maintained. Okay. Now, this is not a new process for them. This is not just like, hey, we're going to be reactive to this $185 million loss. So I made a previous A Healthcare Z video, which I will leave a link to in the show notes.

And a Dr. Peter Pronovost, who used to be at Johns Hopkins when I was there, he became the chief transformation officer for university hospitals five years ago. Okay. And Dr. Peter Pronovost and like what he has done at university hospitals is awesome. So please watch that video. I mean, it is a model for what clinician leaders can do within their own hospital systems. Now, the goal of the university hospital systems is one of many goals. But one of the goals is to provide value to patients and payers to be cost effective.

Isn't that interesting? Without compromising care quality. They say that explicitly. We are not going to compromise care quality at all. But in doing so, we can provide more value to patients and payers, i.e. the employers of Northeast Ohio, of the Cleveland area. Now, Dr. Pronovost previously talked about how they were going to do that. Again, this is all pre-COVID. Okay. This started five years ago. What? Where? Through better systems engineering at the hospital. Through management restructuring. Through a completely changed way, a completely changed data infrastructure.

So the way that they use information technology needed to change. And through change in payment. Not just sole reliance on fee-for-service. Again, this is not just a, oh, we're going to reactively do this. This was a proactive part of the university hospitals vision over five years ago. Now, this is important to their peer major university hospital systems around the country. All hospital systems around the country. In that, I would argue that the bringing value to patients and payers needs to be the goal of every hospital system in America.

Because Dr. Peter Pronovost says that really the reform in healthcare needs to be owned by providers. Okay. Reform in healthcare is not by the government. Reform in healthcare is not by health insurance companies. Reform in healthcare is not by employers. Reform in healthcare needs to be by the doctors and the nurses and the hospital systems and the outpatient clinics themselves. And this is exactly what the university hospitals are doing. They're taking it on themselves. Which brings me to these circles here at the bottom.

And I'm a Gen Xer. And when it comes to like leadership training for Gen Xers, it was largely in the form of this guy, Stephen Covey, in his book, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. And then he wrote a book after that called The Eighth Habit. And in those books, he talks about this concept of the circle of concern and the circle of control. And for people that are very reactive and have a victim mentality, then their circle of concern is much greater than their circle of control. So for a hospital system, it might be like, oh, those insurance companies, they're recalcitrant in their payment.

Or, oh, the government, they keep cutting back on what they pay us or they keep giving us more regulations. Or, oh, our patients have out-of-pocket costs and we can never collect any money from them. And they're talking about all these things that are of concern for them, but might be largely out of their control. So they essentially play the victim. And so the key to success in The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People is to increase the size of your circle of control. That's the entire habit of being proactive is to say, look, there are things that are in your control.

And instead of focusing on what you're concerned about, but you can't control, focus on what you can control, which is exactly what the university hospitals are doing. They're focusing on what they can control, which was their administrative bloat. By definition, they had administrative bloat and they did something about it. Now, they did not say others must change. Okay? They said, what can we change? And so, in my opinion, the university hospitals are the example that other hospital systems in America need to follow.

They're displaying incredible leadership by saying, look, we can play the victim and blame everybody else out there. Or we can look at what we can control, which is to take an honest assessment of our administrative bloat, and we can do something about it. And listen, I'm not trying to be callous to the 117 people that lost their job. But as a physician, my primary responsibility is to patience. Okay? And it is to access to care. And it is to affordability. And to the extent that there are inefficient positions and practices and procedures and technology, etc., that are inhibitors of higher quality, lower cost patient care, then those need to be addressed.

And listen, maybe those people need to be trained for clinical roles. Maybe they would make fantastic medical techs or nurses, or maybe they need to go to medical school and become a doctor. But the point is, is that the patient still comes first, and university hospitals and Dr. Peter Pronovost have turned that into action. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

