Title: US Has Best Healthcare in the World... In Pockets.  How to Play the Healthcare Scavenger Hunt_URFywEB207s
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=URFywEB207s
Language: en
Duration: 6:41
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching AHealthcareZ. Today's topic is the scavenger hunt for healthcare. Now you have probably heard from people in America, politicians, newscasters, a variety of sources that America has the best healthcare in the world. And I will tell you that I agree with that. As much as I criticize the American healthcare system and doctors and hospitals and insurance companies and pharmaceutical companies, I totally agree with that. But I will add two words to that. In pockets.

So America has the best healthcare in the world in pockets. So it's highly variable. You can't talk about the quote unquote average healthcare services or the average healthcare quality or the average healthcare value in America vis-a-vis other places because it's so variable. It's like talking about the average temperature in America. Like, you would never do that. The average temperature in America is a totally useless statistic. You want to know what the temperature is in Miami or Anchorage specifically, not the average temperature.

So we need to know specifically where are those pockets of amazing care in America. So we have to go on a scavenger hunt. Okay. Now, basically the way to like, one of the ways I will say, to basically win the scavenger hunt is to access healthcare like a doctor. Because believe me, doctors know a lot about access in healthcare and skill and expertise. Okay. Because again, in previous videos I have shown this bell shaped curve in terms of like the number of physicians, let's say on the y-axis and just their expertise on the x-axis and it's a bell shaped curve.

And so like you're looking for these folks up here as far to the side as possible in this little area of high expertise. Like you don't want somebody down here and depending upon the complexity of your illness, you might not want somebody in the middle. Okay. So it is so variable that I want to give you some examples. So it might be variable at the physician level. Let me give it an example. So Dr. Robert Brodsky from, who's the head of the hematology division at Johns Hopkins where I did my residency. He is like not only the nation's expert, he's one of the world's experts on a disease called PNH which is paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.

Okay. It's a genetic disease of the blood like it kind of sounds like. Now it's rare. It's incredibly rare. So obviously if you are, if you don't have this condition, you wouldn't try to find Dr. Brodsky as the needle in the haystack. But if you do have this condition, you might not want to be treated by your local hematologist. Okay. Next up. It gets, it's all over the map. So for example, the University of Colorado School of Medicine, it's really known for its outstanding pulmonology department. It's got like the, the best pulmonology department in the country for lung diseases like asthma and emphysema and primary pulmonary hypertension.

Okay. Now, the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, UPMC is known for transplants. So like people, again, like people travel from across the country and across the world to have transplants done at UPMC. Okay. Next up for pediatric care, it's CHOPPS, which is the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. Okay. So for not all pediatric services, but for certain like very severe or rare cases for, for kids, like CHOPPS might be the best place for you. And then like the University of Arkansas is like the best place in the world for a condition called myeloma.

Myeloma. It's kind of like leukemia. It's kind of like a blood cancer. Okay. But like the best place in the world is like in Arkansas. Okay. Who would know that? Who would know that? Like doctors know that. And they know that from their contacts in medical school. They know that from their contacts in residency. They know that from their contacts in the hospital. And I can tell you, I can either direct you to like the doctor for your particular condition. Or if I don't know, I could probably find the doctor who knows the doctor who knows.

So I probably have like two or three degrees of separation to like find that person. Now your typical like layperson, they can't do that. Okay. So I'm going to get to that in a second. Okay. So not only do you need to know, but I'm going to tell you the four things that you need to do to really like win at the scavenger hunt. Okay. You need to be able to think independently. In other words, you need to be able to find these people and not just like be a passive patient and just do whatever the doctor tells you. Like you want to actively seek out, like if you want to actively seek out the best, you need to actively seek out the best.

Okay. Two, you got to travel. You got to be willing to travel. You got to be able to travel. Three, you need time. All of this takes time. Not everybody has the time. And then lastly, this takes money, like personal expenses. Like for the travel that is not going to be covered by your insurance. Okay. So now I understand not everybody has this. Not everybody can have this. So then that question becomes, if you're not doing this, is my local care with my local doctor and at my local hospital is a proxy for the best. And the answer is, there's actually been some studies around this and actually Walmart has some experience around this because they send their associates to centers of excellence.

And guess what? The answer is no, 20 to 50% of the time. So the local care that one of the, and I'll leave a link in the show notes to the Walmart video. But 20 to 50% of the time when the Walmart associate is getting the care at their local doctor and hospital, and then they move them to one of these centers of excellence, their care changes. The plan changes. The diagnosis changes. So it's just important to be aware of this. Now, there are things that you can do to address the thinking independently and the travel and the time and the money.

And I won't get into that today. But just know that if you want the best, like you need to do these things. And if you're not doing these things, there's a 20% to a 50% chance that you might actually not be getting the best care that you possibly could. And so that's how you can navigate the healthcare system in America, which really is a scavenger hunt. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

