Title: Uwe Reinhardt and His Book _Priced Out_... BEST Healthcare Economist for You to Know_Dk0SZUJSibg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dk0SZUJSibg
Language: en
Duration: 10:14
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Uwe Reinhardt and his final book, Priced Out. Now, we're going to talk about healthcare economics today and if there is one healthcare economist that you need to know, it is Uwe Reinhardt. Now, he was a Princeton healthcare economist and he was probably the most famous healthcare economist, not only in America, but probably in the world while he was still alive. And as I'm intimating, he somewhat recently passed away.

So he passed away in 2017. So he lived through like Obamacare and the ACA and so many other health reforms. He was a professor at Princeton for a long time, advisor to the government, etc. Okay. Now, like his name sounds, he was originally born and raised in Germany. And then he moved to Canada and actually went to college in Canada and then came to the United States and eventually got his PhD and got on faculty at Stanford, or Stanford, at Princeton through, I mean, just through tremendous smarts and a ton of hard work.

He really started off with very modest beginnings and worked his way up to becoming an Ivy League professor. Super impressive. Now, he was so well renowned across the world as a healthcare economist that the nation of Taiwan actually called upon him in the nineties to help them design their healthcare system. Because before the nineties, Taiwan like had no healthcare system. And so where they were like, we need one of the smartest people when it comes to healthcare to help us out and how to structure this.

And they called up Uwe Reinhardt. And Taiwan today provides tremendous care and coverage for their, uh, their citizenry. And then we spend like 6% of their GDP on healthcare as opposed to our like 18% here in the United States. So in many respects, Taiwanese healthcare is hugely successful, uh, in large part to Uwe Reinhardt. Now, Uwe Reinhardt's, one of his many claims to fame is that, look, in America, high healthcare costs are due to the prices. And, and he wrote an incredibly famous article in the, uh, excuse me, in the journal, the American medical association, I believe it was in 2003 called, it's the price is stupid, where he outlines that healthcare costs are high in America because the prices are high, right? Healthcare costs, it's a very simple equation, right? It's the price of each service times the number of services.

Okay. So the number of services is utilization. So utilization of healthcare services in America is actually fairly comparable to like other, you know, industrialized economies of the world, like Japan, Germany, Great Britain, France, Switzerland, et cetera. So we like use the same amount of healthcare resources. Other countries actually use more healthcare resources than the United States, but they don't spend as much because their prices are not as high. Let me just give you one example. Okay. For a heart attack, myocardial infarction in the United States, the average hospital stay is nine days.

Okay. In Japan, it's 25 days. All right. Now the total charges, however, in the United States are 25 times higher than they are in Japan. So again, Japan's using a lot more hospital bed days for this one heart attack, but the United States is just charging so much more because the prices are so much higher. And that's why our healthcare costs are higher in America. It's the prices. Okay. Now in his book, and that's why his book is called Priced Out, of course, in his book Priced Out, he brings up a number of wonderful points that we who work in healthcare and health interns all need to understand.

I cannot go through all of them, but I'm going to go through a couple. Okay. One of them is the entire concept of being community rated versus experience rated for an insurance premium. Okay. Now community rated means that each individual's insurance premium is the same. It's very similar. And maybe it's a little different depending upon your age because older people tend to use more healthcare than younger people. But the point is, is that the average, the risk of each individual person is averaged across the community.

And then everybody pays the same amount into the kitty, if you will, for the premium, as opposed to being experience rated, which is based upon your medical history. So the individual health insurance market before the Affordable Care Act was experience rated. So you had to get sort of your past medical history and results, et cetera. And they would say, okay, well, this person with diabetes, heart disease, et cetera, you'll have a higher premium than somebody who does not have any medical problems because it's experience rated.

Now, when things are community rated, that person with diabetes and heart disease has the same premium as the person who doesn't have any, as the person that doesn't have any medical problems. Now, here is the kicker with community rating that Uwe Reinhardt points out. Many of you probably already knew this. You must have a mandate for everyone to pay into the insurance plan. Everybody has to pay premium. You have to, in a community rating, you cannot have people opt out. Everybody has to participate. And if you do not have everybody participate, then the health insurance goes into what is referred to colloquially as the death spiral.

And I'm going to explain what the death spiral is. And I'm going to use a specific example for that. So first off, in general, a death spiral is when the healthy people leave a pool or a company or a group of insured people, they leave and only the sick people are left. And the only way to continue to provide healthcare for the sick people is to keep increasing their premiums. And then more healthy people leave. So the premiums have to keep going up. And then more healthy people leave. And so the premiums keep going up.

And so the premiums become astronomically unaffordable if you have community rating where everybody pays the same premium, but you don't force or compel everyone to pay into the insurance policy. Okay. Let me go through that specific example I'm talking about. So let's say you've got a very simple set here of 100 people, right? And healthcare spending follows the 80-20 rule, right? Where 20% of the people are using 80% of the healthcare dollars. And the other 80% of the people are generally pretty healthy.

They don't have a ton of medical problems. They're only spending about 20% of the total healthcare spend. So let's say each one of these people, the 20 people that are sick and the 80 people that are generally healthy, let's say they each pay a $1 premium. That means there is $100 total to spend on the healthcare for all those people. Okay. That's fine. Now they're all community rated. They all pay the same premium, but these, but of these 80 people, like literally like 50 of them, like half people, like they don't use healthcare at all.

They don't take any medications. They don't go to the doctor. Maybe they get a physical. Maybe they don't. I mean, the point is, is there's a lot of people who pay for health insurance who never use their health insurance during the year. And so those people might save themselves if the premiums are not required, if they have the option of opting out, like we do here now in America, since president Trump changed that. So now you can opt out of the affordable care. You don't have to buy insurance anymore as an individual.

Okay. Let's say 50 of those people leave. So now you're left with those same, of course the 26 people, they're not going to leave because they end up using more than the $1 premium they paid in. They probably use $5, $10 worth of healthcare, right? So those 50 people leave. So now you're end up with 26 people and 30 healthy people. That's only 50 people. Well, in order to get the same, now those 20 people, their healthcare costs or their healthcare spending didn't sort of magically go away. You can't just magically spend less on them.

They still need to take their diabetes medication. They still have to take their heart disease medication. You still got to treat them with a heart attack, et cetera. Okay. So you still got to get the $100. So the only way you can get the $100 from the 50 people is to charge them $2 a person. So in other words, the premium doubled from $1 to $2. Now again, that is exactly the situation that we have here now in America, since we have the Affordable Care Act with community rated premiums. In other words, you can't charge people with diabetes more than people who don't have diabetes, but healthy people have the option to opt out.

So right now we are in a death spiral situation with our ACE cleanse. Now the way that we're averting that death spiral right now is that when the premiums go up, the government is just paying for more of it, right? We're just incurring more debt. And instead of everybody paying a lot more, instead of everybody paying the $2 premium, we're just using greater government subsidies to pay for that. Now this is not a discussion of whether that is right or that is wrong. I'm just saying that as a concept and as a fact of life of what's literally happening today, this is something that everybody in healthcare needs to understand.

Okay. His final point that he makes in his book is that, look, he advocated for single payer healthcare in Taiwan. He says in the United States, the government is too corrupt for single payer healthcare here. So he does not think single payer healthcare is a good idea in America. He basically thinks you should have sort of ACA like coverage where you either decide to have health insurance. And if you decide to not have health insurance, then you can never jump back in. So in other words, you just decide that you're out and you're out for good.

But if you're going to decide that you're in, then you got to stay in for good. I mean, his solution is not perfect either. But his point for all those proponents of single payer healthcare in America, he makes a very interesting point, which is that there is so much regulatory capture and the federal government actually acts in accordance to, let's say, major business or hospital interests, more so than individual voters' interests. The U.S. government is too corrupt for single payer to be practical here.

And that's something for all of us to chew on. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

