Title: Value-Based Care Happened 40 Years Ago... Medicare_s Prospective Payment System Explained_yh7ZuBFVF3k
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yh7ZuBFVF3k
Language: en
Duration: 10:15
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is value-based payment happened 40 years ago and it's called PPS. What in the world is PPS? Okay, so Medicare's prospective payment system went in place almost 40 years ago and it really was value-based care. They didn't call it value-based care, but it was. So if we want to learn about value-based care, we can learn from the past because we've already done it. Now what do I mean? So for hospital inpatient services between 1983 and 1986, so this was phased in over a three-year period of time when Ronald Reagan was president and a Democratic Congress passed it, it's like a bipartisan thing, right? Medicare used to reimburse hospitals essentially a percentage of what it cost the hospital to take care of the Medicare people.

And it was like over 100% because if it cost the hospital like $1,000 to take care of a person, they would pay them like $1,200. Now Medicare quickly caught on, you know, Medicare started in the 1960s, right? Medicare quickly caught on. It's like, whoa, that's unsustainable because all the hospital's going to do is just keep increasing their costs and 20% of $10,000 is a lot more than 20% of $1,000. So they're just going to keep escalating it. So they said, we got to stop this insanity. And instead, we, Medicare, are going to pay a hospital a fixed amount for a hospitalization based upon 468 DRGs, diagnosis-related groups, whether it be a knee surgery or pneumonia or a hip fracture, you name it.

And those diagnosis-related groups, they basically were sort of individual units of resource allocation because the amount of resource allocation that a hospital would use for a pneumonia was different than the amount of resource allocation that they would use for a broken hip. And so they would then reimburse differently based upon that amount of resources that it would need for each of those DRGs. Okay, so you can think of this as sort of capitation at the individual admit level. So you could be admitted for one day, you could be admitted for a month and you would be paid the same amount regardless.

So from Medicare. Now, let's see what happened. Ta-da! Things changed a lot. The length of stay at hospitals in America over that three-year period of time during which prospective payment was implemented went down by 17% for Medicare beneficiaries. Whoa! Almost a fifth. Admits and discharges went down by 3.5%. Okay, so the hospital was like, well look, if we don't get paid more the longer you stay, we're just not going to have you stay as long. And the hospital was like, hey, for some of these people, they shouldn't, I mean, we'll still get paid if we do it on an outpatient basis, but we shouldn't admit them at all.

Because we could rack up the charges and get paid more if they were admitted. But we could just get paid as an outpatient. And guess what happened as a result of that? 300,000 cataract surgeries per year were no longer inpatient. Believe it or not, in America, we used to do inpatient cataract surgery. It's almost universally outpatient today. They used to be hugely inpatient. Why? There was no clinical justification for it. They did it because they could get paid more. And look what happened when the reimbursement changed.

Okay, now, let's, okay, so they were booting people out of the hospital faster and not admitting many people. Let's look at the outcomes associated with that. Readmission rates, zero change. Isn't that interesting? So people were being discharged out of the hospital sooner, they weren't coming back more. Next, 30-day mortality after admission increased by 0.6 percentage points from 6.6% to 7.2%. Now, they said that the overall mortality rate for Medicare beneficiaries went down by 3% during that period of time.

So you might say, okay, okay, so the mortality rate after admission actually went up just a little itsy bitsy bit. And the analysis from the article that I will leave a link to in the show notes said that it was because the patients were essentially sicker who were admitted. So it was basically because of that decrease of 3.5% of admissions. In other words, all the easy soft admissions of those cataract surgeries, you don't die from cataract surgery. So all those easy soft admissions from the cataract surgery that had essentially zero mortality, you took those out because they weren't admitted anymore.

And so therefore you increased the mortality associated with inpatient, if that makes sense. Okay, next up. Medicare, now, did it save Medicare money? Yes. Medicare payments to hospitals before prospective payment was put in was increasing at a rate of 10.1% per year. And then after prospective payment was put in, it increased at 5.7% per year. So it still was increasing, it still was inflating, but it slowed the rate of increase. It essentially halved the rate of Medicare spending's increase. Okay. Now, so in other words, did clinical practice change because of prospective payment? Like for the people that are actually in the hospital, did things change? Yes.

And I'll leave a link to it in the show notes. I made a video about how, look, when hospitals have admit capitation for Medicare patients, they're only going to get paid X amount for that admission, sort of regardless. Guess what the hospital does? They do a better job of inpatient care coordination where they actually have teams of nurses and case managers and physical therapists and occupational therapists, everybody else gets together along with the physician. I used to be in these meetings to better coordinate the inpatient care of the Medicare beneficiaries.

We didn't do it for commercial insurance folks because the commercial insurance folks were still getting paid for every day. So if you had a 20-day stay versus a 10-day stay for commercial insurance folks, the hospital actually got paid more for the 20-day stay versus the 10-day stay. But for Medicare, they paid the same. They paid the same if it was 10-day versus 20-day. So their motivation was to get them out in 10 days and not 20 days. Okay. So, and I'll leave a link to the show note where I talk about that dynamic.

So, arguably, that was an improvement in the process of care because you had better inpatient care coordination and better discharge planning. Okay. Now, interestingly, there was a spillover effect to the commercial insurance plans after prospective payment as well. In that outpatient services for people on commercial insurance who are under the age of 65, outpatient services increased from beforehand, they were increasing at 3.3% per year, to they were increasing at 8.1%. So it was an acceleration and increase of outpatient services.

Now, why would that happen? Why would there...so there was increase in Medicare outpatient services, right? Like all those cataract surgeries, it's not like the cataract surgeries weren't done. They just did them outpatient instead of inpatient. So, what happens is that a hospital then sets up and the physician is like, okay, I've got my outpatient patient flow for my cataracts. And, oh, by the way, if you happen to be 62 and on a commercial insurance plan because you're still working, I'm not going to change my entire process.

So, in other words, the process that they created for the Medicare folks was then applied to the commercial insurance folks. They had the nurses, they had the OR staff, they had everything set up to do this on an outpatient basis instead of an inpatient basis. And so the commercial folks just kind of followed right along with that. Okay, now, what are a few implications that we need to understand vis-à-vis value-based payment today versus what happened 40 years ago? Notice, this happened, this was implemented in three years, okay? The ACA was passed 11 years ago.

So, Medicare was able to make huge changes in the way they paid hospitals in a three-year period of time. And it actually worked pretty well. Like, the hospital system in America didn't collapse. And here we are, twiddling our thumbs, dilly-dallying around for 11 years with all of these quote-unquote different plans and blah, blah, blah. And, like, very little has changed. So, what's happened here? I think what happened was is that back in the early 1980s, healthcare was only 10% of our economy. And today it's 18% of our economy.

So, healthcare as a beast is actually twice the size. It used to be a five-foot beast and now it is a ten-foot beast. Or, I guess it used to be a ten-foot beast and now it's an 18-foot beast. So, and as, I'll leave the link in the show note to Steve Brill's book about America's Bitter Pill, about how really the hospital industry, the health insurance industry, the pharmaceutical industry, the medical device industry, I mean, they essentially have, because there's so much money in the state, they have so much sway in the government regardless of if it's Republican or Democratic administrations, that you see how the healthcare industry really held sway over the ACA.

And so, I think what you're seeing, the reason the ACA has taken 11 years to have, like, almost minimal effect, and in the 80s they were able to do huge effects in just three years, is because in the 80s, this is just my assessment, in the 80s there was probably much less sway of the healthcare industry in terms of the actual legislative and executive processes within our federal government, versus today. You know, it is potentially much more corporatism today than they had back in the 80s, and that's why you're seeing some slow, minimal change over the last 11 years.

So, what's my point with that? Don't hold your breath! Don't hold your breath! If you're an employer, broker, benefit, consult, whatever, like, don't think, in my opinion, don't think the government's gonna, I mean, look, look what's happened so far. You see any major healthcare changes? Not so much, right? So, don't hold your breath. If you want change, you need to make it happen in your organization, because there is probably not gonna be some major systemic change, what they had back in the 80s. It probably is just not gonna happen.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Seed..

