Title: Warren Buffett_ Newest Thoughts on Healthcare_ykYTPJpD3qI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ykYTPJpD3qI
Language: en
Duration: 6:13
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is Warren Buffett and his newest insights on healthcare. All right, so this comes from the Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting of 2021, which just happened on May 1st of this year. And it is a very long broadcast. It's like over five hours long, but at four hours and 15 minutes, and I will leave a link to it in the show notes, you can specifically hear his comments on Haven and why Haven failed in its mission to lower healthcare costs, fix healthcare, like whatever fantastic things he was supposed to do in healthcare.

It failed. And Warren Buffett specifically talks about why that was. Now, he says, so I got a couple of quotes up here. He says, look, healthcare is the tapeworm of the U.S. economy. He said that before. That's nothing new, but he adds, and the tapeworm won. So he basically admitted defeat. So Haven failed because the forces opposing Haven's success won. All right. Who was opposing Haven's success? Well, Warren Buffett talks a little about that. His next quote is this. He says, look, the most prestigious people in the community are on the hospital boards.

A lot of people that are fairly happy with the system. Whoa. Let's unpack that a little bit. The most prestigious people are fairly happy. And I think that makes a very good point. Are things really going to change when prestigious people are happy? No. Prestigious people that are happy generally like to stay that way and are not necessarily looking for things to change. So we talk about the U.S. healthcare system being, you know, too expensive. We talk about the quality being too variable. We talk about not enough access to healthcare.

We talk about healthcare professionals like doctors and nurses that are burnt out and completely stressed out. And yet we have the people at the top of these organizations, the boards of directors of these hospitals, who, in Warren Buffett's opinion, are fairly happy. Now, what might be the source of this information for Warren Buffett? Okay. Warren Buffett has some direct connections to some hospital boards. Okay. Warren Buffett right there. First connection to Charlie Munger, the vice chairman of Berkshire Hathaway.

He, for 31 years, 31 years, has been on the board of Good Samaritan Hospital in Los Angeles. Good Samaritan only recently in 2019 became a part of PIH, the Presbyterian Hospital system, also located in Los Angeles. Not a very big hospital system, but now Good Samaritan is part of that. So Charlie Munger has seen firsthand what the board of directors of a hospital involves for 31 years. And something tells me that over the course of time, Warren Buffett, Charlie Munger probably talked a little bit about healthcare, especially while Haven was going on.

Okay. Next up, another member of the Berkshire Hathaway board of directors is Tom Murphy. Now, Tom Murphy is one of the most famous and well-respected CEOs in America, maybe even in American history. Warren Buffett says that Tom Murphy is like the best CEO he has ever known. Now, Tom Murphy is the former CEO of ABC Capital City. So he grew this television station, little Capital Cities, to the point of buying ABC. And then he sold the whole thing to Disney for gazillions of dollars. And guess what? Tom Murphy is on the board of NYU Langone in New York City.

Again, one of the most famous, largest, most prestigious hospitals in America. So, on both the West Coast and the East Coast, something tells me over the course of time that maybe Warren Buffett might have talked to Tom Murphy, maybe about his experience on the NYU Langone board of directors, maybe what some of the other board members think and how they feel, that maybe those conversations might have happened. And maybe those conversations might have happened to Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger. So, one might argue that Warren Buffett's opinion might be not perfect, but it's fairly educated.

Okay. That brings me to my final point for today, which is, look, at least for a lot of hospitals, these, you can identify who these happy, prestigious people are. You can identify the board of directors for the majority of major medical centers in America. So, for the Cleveland Clinic, you can exactly, you can find out who the happy, prestigious people are. For the Mayo Clinic, you can find their board of directors as well. You can find the happy, prestigious people. For Johns Hopkins, where I did my residency, you can find the happy, prestigious board members.

Okay. Likewise, for UPMC, for Intermountain, for Geisinger, for all of these most reputable medical centers in America, you can see who these people are, which is good. I mean, that is a basic degree of transparency that I think is important for the hospital to have. That if the people that are running the hospital are people that you, like, disagree with, at least you can find out who they are. Except, except here in Dallas, Fort Worth, Texas, where the three major hospital systems, which are the Baylor, Scott, and White healthcare system, the Texas Health Resources healthcare system, and the Methodist hospital system, all three of those hospital systems do not post their board of directors anywhere on their websites.

At least, not that I could find. Maybe you look and you can do a better search than I could do. I could not, I'm sure it's just a coincidence that all three of them don't post their names of their boards of directors on their websites. But my point is, it's totally outside the norm. Like, Baylor and THR and Methodist are totally outliers when it comes to transparency around who is actually on their board of directors, in terms of who the actual happy, prestigious people are at these hospitals for a metropolitan area that has six going on seven million people.

So, listen, when it comes to, like, who's in charge, and who's wanting things to change, and who's not wanting things to change, then I think Warren Buffett makes a very interesting comment about hospital boards of directors here. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

