Title: What Health Insurance Do Health Insurance Companies Give Their Own Employees__6VNqbxFZUYk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6VNqbxFZUYk
Language: en
Duration: 8:12
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching AHealthcareZ. Today's topic is health insurance for insurance companies' employees themselves. That's right. Let's take a look at the type of health insurance that health insurance companies provide for their own employees. And why is this important? This is important because health insurance companies have all the data from the claims and from the employees and their demographics. And so if anyone knows the answer around how to effectively control costs in an employee health plan, it would be the health insurance companies themselves because they don't have only their data, but they have all their customers' data as well for millions and millions of people.

And they have all the different plan designs. Think of the hundreds and even thousands of different plan designs that they can model out themselves. And they can see the implications on the claims based upon the plan designs. Again, not just for their own company, but for all their customers as well. And they can see all of the different programs. Wellness, telemedicine, navigation, center of excellence, you name it. They can see all of their groups that have those different programs. And they've got the data on the claims.

So if anyone knows, they know. Okay, fine. So they know in terms of healthcare cost containment. But they also have to balance what every other employer needs to balance in terms of being able to attract and retain employees. Health insurance companies have incredibly talented salespeople. Insurance brokerages and benefits consulting firms and many other vendors, they're trying to hire away those salespeople. These health insurance companies have huge technology and software departments. A lot of them are overseas, but a lot of them are in the US.

They have attract and retain these software developers. That's really hard to do. So they have to provide a highly competitive benefits package to keep those people. So they've got to balance the healthcare cost containment with the attracting and retaining employees, just like every other company. So let's examine what they do. So I've got three health insurance companies up here. Health insurance company number one offers four different employee health plans. It's three HSA plans and one HMO plan. The deductibles on those plans kind of range from about $1,000 per employee per year to about $3,000 per employee per year.

Double that for family, right? $2,000 for a family or $6,000 for a family. They offer free telemedicine. Telemedicine seems fairly widespread these days, used by one of these health insurance companies. On their prescription benefit, 20% coinsurance on all of their prescriptions after the deductible on the HSA plans. Okay? And they do offer healthcare navigation services. Now, full disclaimer, I founded a healthcare navigation company, Compass Professional Health Services. So all of these other insurance carriers, they kind of started offering healthcare navigation services like after we kind of created the company and what we do.

So, you know, to a certain extent, invitation is the finest form of flattery. But at the end of the day, listen, navigating healthcare systems hard, they've got to realize it just like we realized it at Compass. So they offer navigation for their employees. And of course, like so many other companies, they still offer wellness. They haven't thrown in the towel, wellness, they absolutely offer wellness. Interestingly, the employees can earn wellness dollars and they can earn up to $500 for an individual, about, it's a little bit more than $500.

And then double that for families. So they absolutely are doing, you know, significant financial incentives for wellness programs, you know, things to the extent of biometric screening, health risk assessments, and then various other programs around gaps in care closure, you could say preventive screening for colonoscopies, weight loss programs, et cetera, et cetera. Okay. Health Insurance Company number two also offers four plans. It's two HSA plans, one HRA plan, and again, another HMO plan. The deductible, similar to Insurance Company number one, I would just say a little less.

Okay. Now, they also offer telemedicine. Okay. So it's not free or limited use like company number one. So they have it, they are using telemedicine as well, but there is going to be some associated cost the employees are going to have to pay for it. Okay. Interestingly, their prescriptions also have coinsurance, right? Because you can't have co-pays on the HSA compatible plans. But they have various levels of coinsurance. So some of the plans have 20% coinsurance. Some have 30%. Some have 40%. So there's some plans where frankly the coinsurance is higher for health insurance carrier number two, vis-a-vis health insurance carrier number one, again, after the deductible.

Again, they offer navigation services as well, just like company one. Again, wellness dollars as well, similar program, similar dollar amount in terms of what you can earn to go into your HSA account or your HRA account, et cetera. Interestingly, they've also added center of excellence programs where they're going to decrease or eliminate the out-of-pocket costs if you use a center of excellence program for like a major surgery, whether it be like bariatric weight loss surgery, drain replacement, et cetera.

They also covered travel costs as well, similar to other center of excellence programs like from Walmart that I've described in previous A Health Care Z videos. They also have an on-site clinic. Obviously, they have many locations. So it's not all of their locations where they have on-site clinics, but they do, they have invested in the on-site clinic as well for their employees. Okay. Finally, we have health insurance company number three. Again, interestingly, four plans. Apparently four is the magic number. Okay.

Two HSA plans, one HRA plan, and one, let's just call it, it's kind of like a catastrophic plan. It's a high deductible health plan. It has some co-pays for things. Deductibles are $1,000 up to over $4,000 for an individual, double all that for a family. Also wellness dollars, similar type programs, similar type dollars amount to companies one and two. They do offer a second opinion program. Again, we see a lot of employers that use second opinion programs. They're the only one out of these three that does use a second opinion service.

They actually use a vendor for it. Interestingly, they do not offer any telemedicine. They also do not offer any navigation. So it's not universal. It was obviously prominent in plans one and two, but not in three. Okay. Now, what can we glean from this? Okay. What is not on here at all? There are no traditional PPO plans. No PPO plans. Okay. There are no prescription co-pays. Okay. To a certain extent, the fact that the folks that know the most about health insurance themselves, the health insurance carriers, they don't use co-pays anymore.

To a certain extent, that probably tells us that co-pays are antiquated. Keep in mind, 47% of commercially insured people through their jobs are still on a PPO plan with co-pays. So that means, you know, it's like what's good for the goose is good for the gander. And I'm sure many of you know this already. It's like, isn't that interesting that the people who know the most about health insurance have essentially found that the co-pay is an ineffective tool for controlling healthcare costs and attracting and retaining employees.

They essentially don't use that co-pay tool anymore. Okay. Next up. Obviously, they all use wellness programs. Okay. So obviously, there's debate, you know, is wellness effective? It's not. But from their perspective, with all their claims and with all their experience, they do it. Now, what's interesting is that that's not the only thing they do. So all of them do something in addition to wellness. And so we've kind of seen this, right? There's still a lot of companies where they're kind of, you know, real heavy and that's kind of what they do.

But all these other companies have branched out into these other areas. Telemedicine, navigation, centers of excellence, on-site clinics. So they've got the data. They know. So we need to pay attention to what the health insurance companies themselves are doing for their own employees. And that's my point for today. And thank you for watching the Healthcare Seed..

