Title: What a Hospital CEO Should Do_397tqDzHXng
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=397tqDzHXng
Language: en
Duration: 6:16
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is what a hospital CEO should do. Now this is probably the most presumptuous video that I have ever made but I'm gonna do it anyway. Now, pain causes change and that's a quote from Stephen Covey and I love so much of Stephen Covey's work. He has passed away but from seven habits of highly effective people etc. So if we're going to talk about change in healthcare, well in the current pain of coronavirus both from hospitals that are actually dealing with coronavirus and two from the financial pain from decreased patient volume that we've talked about so much, there's quite a bit of pain right now for hospital systems.

So what kind of changes should be put in place? Here are my ideas around that and it's really a synthesis of four changes and what order they should occur in based upon my previous videos and I will leave a link to those previous videos in the show notes. So they fall into two categories, operational changes and financial changes and then things that should be done first and things that should be done second. Now I believe the operational and the financial changes can be done in parallel because they're largely going to be done by separate people and parts of the hospital.

So the first two things that can be done in parallel are one operationally would put in a quality improvement course. This comes from Dr. Brent James from the Intermountain Healthcare System where he said the very first thing he would do to improve quality at a hospital would be to put in a quality improvement training course first so that everyone whether it be the nurses, the respiratory therapists, the doctors, etc. they can all speak the same language when it comes to quality improvement because they're the frontline workers.

They see the patients on a daily basis and they're the ones that frankly will have the best ideas about quality improvement but they don't know how to do it and they don't know how to talk to each other effectively because they've never gone through a quality improvement training course and so that is the basis for the change. It's also the basis for the change because quality and the patient and doing what is best for the patient comes first. Okay likewise what can occur simultaneously is to put in a cost financially can be is to put in a cost accounting system as I explained in the video from the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center and this also is incredibly important because it will provide the financial tie and the financial measurement around the quality improvement changes that are occurring and they can really occur in my opinion in parallel at the same time and I'm going to say a year for both of these to get in place.

You know could it be at six months? Could it be two years? Sure, but we need to have reasonable progress in reasonable time. Okay next up the second batch of things I would do would be to put in a digital command center as is explained by GE and what they put in at Johns Hopkins Hospital because of all of the complexity and lack of coordination problems that hospitals have both within the hospital and across facilities think about it you can not only do it for within the hospital but you could do it between various ambulatory clinics and the hospital as well and you can integrate all that with the command center.

Now what the command center will do is is it will highlight and it will point out problems or breakdowns in patient care and so it needs to occur after the quality improvement course because this is the why part down here because you have to prep the staff for the command center challenges that they're going to see so in other words they're going to see patient problems they're going to see crowded waiting rooms they're going to see supply chain breakdowns and there needs to be this baseline in place in terms of quality improvement to be able to fix those problems otherwise if you put in the command center without the ability to fix the problem all you're going to do is be like look we got a really full waiting room or look we've run out of supplies or look we've had bad patient outcomes and then you won't necessarily know how to fix it.

Okay next up the second thing to do which can occur again in parallel to the command center is to start a health plan as in what they did at Intermountain Healthcare and Geisinger and UPMC as well. Now the reason that starting a health plan has to be done after the cost accounting system is because you need the cost accounting system to know what a knee replacement actually costs you to know what a gallbladder surgery actually costs you to know what a five-day hospital save for pneumonia actually costs you and so you can model and then subsequently reduce expenses in order for this health plan to actually appropriate set the premiums right because of course the huge challenge on the health plan side is to set the premium high enough to cover your cost in the patient care and then you can lower the patient care and then over time you can then lower the premium keeping whatever margin there is between the patient care costs and the premium and then you can be more cost competitive against traditional commercial insurance carriers because of these efficiencies that you've done and the internal efficiencies that a hospital-run health plan would get would run circles if done effectively would run circles around a commercial health plan in regards to the premium that they could trust could charge it would be so much lower than a commercial health plan premium it's unreal okay and again this can be done in parallel with the command center so again i'll put this at another year here and i'll put this at another year here so i'm not saying six months i'm not saying a decade right so i'm saying two years to get all this at least underway now of course there's going to be a gazillion different tweaks and my and my rationale for that timeline is is if you look back at what the united states had to do during world war ii i mean we could crank out a ship incredibly fast like with no computers and the point is is that if we could totally rearrange organizations and like change a factory from building cars to building airplanes back in the 1940s we can do this today we can do it and that's my point for today and thank you for watching me healthcare scene.

