Title: What Makes an A-Plus Insurance Broker_o_2ay9J9gmY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ay9J9gmY
Language: en
Duration: 6:41
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is insurance brokers and benefits consultants, specifically the traits that make them A plus brokers and benefits consultants. So at Compass we had over 2,000 employer clients and each one of those clients probably had a team of anywhere from two to like 10 or even more brokers and benefits consultants. So I have literally worked with hundreds and hundreds of brokers and benefits consultants over the years and I have seen the full gamut of really really good ones and not so good ones.

So today I'm going to tell you about three characteristics that I saw in the really good A plus brokers and benefits consultants. And some of these might be a little unique and I will also say some of them might be a little controversial but we're going to go there anyway. First of all, they were transparent and flexible in how they were paid. Right? So this can, this is a, I could go on and on forever about this. We could do 20 videos about this. But some brokers and consultants are on retainer. Some of them charge a PEPM.

Some of them have commission up to a cap. Some of them would be straight commission but they would at least be open and honest about what all that commission was. Because there are, believe it or not, in this day and age there are still many, many, many consultants and brokers that do not fully disclose all of the ways they're being paid. And so there's the old expression, whose bread I eat, his song I sing. And the really good brokers and consultants, they work for their clients. They don't work for the carrier.

They don't work for any other vendors. They work for the clients. And so they need to make sure that they are very clear with their clients in terms of how they're getting paid. Now, that is done to build trust. Now, the squirrely thing about this is the issue, and this is again, totally controversial. I'm probably going to get lots of hate messages about this, is the issue of including carrier overrides in that compensation. Now, oftentimes it's not called an override, right? We don't like to use that term. Retention bonus, marketing bonus, all sorts of different euphemisms for overrides.

But it's really important because I've seen many, many, many brokers and consultants who have a significant bias against placing their clients with a TPA because they're getting a major Buka override and they don't want to lose that. And so, hey, listen, is their Buka ASO the right solution for them? Maybe it is, but maybe there's a TPA that's the right solution for them and you want to have that decision be as objective as possible. Okay. Next up, these brokers and consultants had tremendous people skills, fantastic interpersonal skills, huge emotional intelligence.

And because that was super important because it allowed them to help navigate the client's bureaucracy. Okay. So if this company had 10 people or a hundred people or a thousand people or 10,000 people or a hundred thousand people, being able to navigate these bureaucracies is paramount to getting stuff done. Helping HR navigate that bureaucracy, helping finance navigate that bureaucracy. If there's technological changes that need to be, helping the technology navigate that bureaucracy. You can have the best ideas in the world.

If you cannot successfully navigate the bureaucracy of an organization, all those ideas are worth nothing because you cannot implement them. And I mean, I have seen brokers and consultants work a meeting and it's like a work of art. It's like a Picasso. And I have seen other brokers and consultants throw so many wrenches into meetings. It's unbelievable. So that is a huge skill that I saw in successful brokers and consultants. And I think it can be learned personally. Okay. Now, and of course that those people skills allow for trust to be built with HR and the CFO, HR and the CFO.

Because again, if you don't have their trust, then you're not going to be able to execute on navigating through that bureaucracy. Okay. Point number three, and this is going to be crazy controversial. Okay. They are good looking. Okay. And by good looking, I don't mean like, you know, blessed with a beautiful bone structure and perfect symmetry. What I mean is, is they visually took care of themselves. What do I mean by that? They had a decent haircut. They had, you know, a good outfit or clothes that were appropriate.

They had, you know, they, they look good. They look put together. They weren't slovenly. I mean, I have seen like brokers go into meetings and they're like unshaven and they still have like some bed head going on. And I'm not talking about some like contemporary, like trendy beard. I'm like, it was obvious this person did not shave. And so now I, I will tell you that again, like this is done to instill trust and confidence because right. Everybody knows that 85% of communication is nonverbal. So honestly, like smiling, smiling makes you look good.

Speaking confidently makes you look good. Having enthusiasm makes you look good. You can take a quote unquote beautiful person and you can make them frown and you can give them low energy and you can make them ungood looking. Okay. So, and again, this is done because subconsciously we need to instill confidence and trust in the client. And that can be done with being good looking. Now you can be good looking and have brains. And I have seen many A plus brokers and consultants who created me smart. Really? I mean, it was like impressive how well they knew their stuff and how intelligent they were.

Like I have also seen really good looking brokers be incredibly successful and they were not that smart, but they had the humility to recognize that they didn't necessarily have the brains, but they could find the brains. In fact, these are some of the best. Listen, if they are dumb and arrogant, that is a horrible combination. But if they knew they didn't have the brains, but they knew how to source the brains, hugely successful. Some of the most successful brokers and consultants and their clients were then subsequently successful fell into that category.

And so listen, I know that this is just my list. You might disagree with this list. That is totally okay. But I wanted to share with you three traits that I found in A plus insurance brokers and consultants. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

