Title: Where_s My Money_ Part 2_ Doctor Pay Fails to Keep Pace with Healthcare Costs_GGAYuJrBKnc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GGAYuJrBKnc
Language: en
Duration: 2:37
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Since 2015, doctor pay has gone up by 29%, just a bit more than inflation. But guess what overall healthcare costs jumped up by during the same time period? 52%! That's almost twice the rate of inflation since 2015, and way more than doctor pay. What's really going on here? I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and I'm also a healthcare finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially, and that's why I've partnered with KnowMeHealth to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. Why are overall healthcare costs rising so much faster than doctor pay? Well, there are many reasons, but let me give you just two.

Reason number one, hospital costs are high. Hospitals negotiate higher reimbursement from commercial insurance companies compared to doctors. On average, hospitals are paid 224% of Medicare by commercial insurance, whereas doctors are only paid 129% of Medicare. Reason number two, prescriptions are expensive. The U.S. spends almost $1,000 per person per year on prescription medication. In other industrialized countries, it's half as much. Let me give you an example that ties these reasons together. If a patient with rheumatoid arthritis needs a knee replacement, the hospital will be paid over $50,000.

If that same patient takes Humira for their rheumatoid arthritis, it costs $78,000 per year. On the other hand, if a doctor sees the same patient four times in a year, they'll be paid $600. Where's all the money going in healthcare? It's not going to the doctors. But there is a solution that can bring down healthcare costs for our nation and make sure doctors receive their fair share. It's called direct contracting. Many doctors are already doing it, but if you aren't, you should look into it. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and this is Healthcare Uncovered, where we break down a broken system.

vier days, the machine is tried- four days, three days, three days, three days, three days, three hours... to contain coronavirus hae- two days and three days, tropon, one year-對不對..

