Title: Where Does Medical Trend Come From__oLjHf9_5GQc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5GQc
Language: en
Duration: 6:34
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is where does medical trend come from? And yes, I know I ended that with a preposition, please forgive me. So medical trend for 2020 is estimated to be about 6% and I'll leave a link in the show notes. And of course, this is very important as we approach the fall and renewals, you're going to see on your renewals, especially your fully insured groups, that you're going to see this thing called medical trend and it's going to have a percentage.

It might be 6%. A lot of times people see, okay, trend is going to be an 8% because they want to leave some negotiating wiggle room with the broker and the group. Okay, that's fine. Where in the world does that medical trend come from? Where does that number come from? I'm going to tell you right now. When an insurance carrier and a hospital negotiate their contracts, it is a 12 to 18 month process. So of course, they don't want to go through that every year. So they actually only renegotiate their contracts.

Like oftentimes only every three to five years. And as part of that negotiation process, the hospital system usually requires what's referred to as an evergreen provision or an evergreen clause that says on a yearly basis that the sort of per unit compensation from the insurance carrier to the hospital or reimbursement, I should say, is going to be, is going to go up every year about 6% or 8% or 4% or whatever they negotiate on. And so the insurance carrier then takes that percentage increase from the evergreen clause and then translates that into the medical trend for its customers.

So that's essentially where medical trend comes from. Now we're going to break that down into more detail, right? Because obviously overall healthcare costs follow a very simple equation. It is the price times the utilization. It's the price of the MRI times the number of MRIs. It's the price of the surgery times the number of surgeries, et cetera. You get it. So if the overall healthcare costs for the hospital system are going up, then either one of three things is happening. Either the price is going up, the utilization is going up, or both are going up.

And the fact of the matter is for the most recent past, as in like a decade, it's the utilization that has been flat and it's the prices that have been going up. So the hospital has been raising its prices. Utilization has largely been flat. In some cases, it's actually been going down. But the hospitals have been raising their prices. That's where it comes from, okay? From that evergreen clause where the hospital is raising their prices on the unit cost. Now, that then begs the question, okay, the majority of these hospitals in America are not for profit.

So if they're raising the prices, where's the money going? It's not going to a huge profit margin because they're not for profit hospitals. Okay. Well, let's look specifically at hospital costs for you, the plan and your overall medical trend, because hospital costs are the largest chunk. Hospital costs make up 33% of total healthcare costs. It's the number one bucket. So where do hospital costs come from? The number one source of costs for a hospital is in their labor costs. Healthcare is largely a services business.

Labor amounts to 60% of the overall cost structure of a hospital. And it's in the wages for the people. Well, there's only two ways that labor costs can go up. Either the wages are going up or the number of people are going up or both. So let's examine that. So there has been a 75% increase in the number of healthcare workers from 1990 to 2012. And that trend has largely continued. So you can say that the industry has essentially almost doubled over a 12 year period of time. Now, did the population of America double during that period of time? Did all of a sudden Americans just become much more sick during that period of time? No.

But the number of healthcare workers almost doubled over a 12 year period of time. Now, maybe we got a gazillion doctors now. No, the point is we do not have a gazillion doctors now because 95% of that increase in healthcare workers was non-doctors. In fact, I'll leave a link in the show note. There's a ratio of about 16 people for every one doctor. Now, it takes about $823,000 per year of labor that is non-physician to go along with that physician. Now, 63% of all of this increase in jobs and all of the employment in the healthcare space is for non-clinicians.

So in other words, you've got 5% that are doctors, but then you've got only, you know, what's that going to be? That's going to be 7%. Gets you up to 70 to 90. That's 27%. That's going to be 32%. 32% are then clinical. The nurses, the med techs, etc. And then you have 63 that are non-clinical. Front desk people, billers, managers, etc. And just to give you an example of how explosive this job work is, there were 119,000 new healthcare jobs in the six months alone, the first six months alone of 2013. Now, in six months, was there like an explosion of patients? Was there an explosion of disease? Was there an explosion of surgery? No! Okay? The same patient volume essentially was happening during that six-month period of time, and they added 119,000 jobs, the majority of which were non-clinical jobs.

So essentially, if you connect all of these dots, that medical trend comes from the evergreen increase, which comes from increased prices for increased labor expenditures by the hospitals, which is mainly going to non-clinician staff. So essentially, you, employer, your medical trend is essentially a big healthcare jobs program. Now, of course, immediately, the hospitals are going to come back and they'll say, well, we've got to have all these people to deal with the denials and the pre-certification from the insurance company.

We've got all this measurement we have to do from Medicare now. Hey, listen, those might be completely legitimate reasons to have to hire more people. But the point is, is that medical trend is creating healthcare jobs. That's what it does. And thank you for watching a healthcare scene. Thank you. Thank you..

