Title: Who Controls Health Insurance Companies_ _651 Billion in Spending for 56 Million People_VaeCTb27ehI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VaeCTb27ehI
Language: en
Duration: 5:15
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is 70 people control $651 billion in healthcare spending for 56 million people. Now what am I talking about here? So, those 70 people are the executive teams and the board of directors combined for United Health Group, CVS Health and Cigna. Now, if you divide the $651 billion of healthcare spending for those three companies by the 70 people, that means that each one of those people is in effect in charge of $9.3 billion of healthcare spending for 800,000 people each.

I mean that is a huge responsibility. That is a lot of people and that is a lot of money per person. Now, let's look at the racial breakdown of those groups and gender breakdown. So, 60 of those 70 people are white and 10 are minorities. Of the 60 white people, 49 are white males and 11 are white females or white women. Of the 10 minorities, there are 5 minority men and 5 minority women. Now, let's compare that on a percentage basis to the overall U.S. population. Are these 70 people representative of the 56 million people whose healthcare spending they control? So, this group of 70 people is 85% white versus the United States population which is 60% white.

Okay. The number of women is 16 divided by 70. This is 23% women are the leaders of these three healthcare organizations versus 50% of the U.S. population. So, in terms of the control of the spending for these 56 million people, it is by and large white males and not women and minorities. Next up. So, if we're going to change healthcare, let's just say just for these 56 million people, then we probably need to change these 60 people. Either one, their thinking and their behavior needs to change or just the people themselves need to change.

Okay. That begs the question, who is capable of changing these 70 people? Okay. I would argue the government is capable of changing those 70 people whether it be through, let's just say, an action by the state or federal government in terms of a major lawsuit that they might bring against them that might maybe even like break them up or cause them to take certain actions that would have to then dismiss certain of these executives. Next, the shareholders could arguably, I guess, with a proxy vote, potentially get rid of the CEO or board of directors or what have you.

So, the shareholders have some degree of control here. Arguably, the employees actually have some degree of control because, I mean, they could like boycott, they could quit, they are very, you know, and we've seen sort of employee pushback against management at places like Facebook and Google, where if the employees like didn't like a certain policy that the company had, then the employees would like, you know, get a petition, etc, etc. So, there could be employee activism against these 70 people. Okay.

So, it's theoretical, of course. Okay. So, who really cannot change these 70 people? Okay. I would argue patients cannot change these 70 people. I would argue that the actual customers, the actual 56 million people whose healthcare spending these 70 people control, I would argue they cannot change those 70 people. Okay. I would also argue that healthcare workers, doctors, nurses, therapists, etc., I would argue they cannot change those 70 people, right? And that kind of makes sense, right? Because when it comes to the view of what these three health insurance companies do, in general, patients and healthcare workers have a very low opinion.

And, I mean, if the business was responsible to its customers, then no business would survive if they had customers that didn't like them. So, obviously, patients and healthcare workers actually have very little to no impact on those 70 people. So, what's my point for today? My point is I'm trying to be as objective as possible when it comes down to large amounts of healthcare spending for large numbers of people. And it is heavily concentrated, not within companies, okay? It's heavily concentrated within people.

Those 70 specific people. Organizations are just groups of people. Like, the New England Patriots and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers are not organizations that are abstract. They are like what used to be Don Brady in one place and it's Don Brady now, okay? It is a specific person who has a specific role and has made specific decisions that affect the impact of the New England Patriots and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, okay? So, like, healthcare is not that different. And I wanted to bring that point to you today. And thank you for watching A Healthcare Z..

