Title: Why Doctors Are Choosing Alternative Networks and Direct Contracting Outside Traditional Insurance_CvQj_2orkX8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2orkX8
Language: en
Duration: 4:30
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Doctors, have you thought about joining an unconventional or alternative network? Do you know what all the buzz is about? Well, there are a lot of advantages that you might not be aware of, and today I'm going to be breaking it all down for you. I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and I'm also a healthcare finance expert. I know how doctors get taken advantage of financially, and that's why I've partnered with KnowMeHealth to share with you what I know. This is Healthcare Uncovered. More and more doctors are signing direct contracts and agreements with networks outside of traditional health insurance carriers.

The reason for this shift is due to three main factors. One, increased patient volume. Two, better rates than Medicare. And three, faster payment. First, let's discuss increased patient volume. Direct contracts and alternative networks have a lower or zero out-of-pocket cost for patients. Typically with traditional insurance, a patient will have at least a $1,000 or $2,000 deductible, and then an additional 20% coinsurance after that, meaning their out-of-pocket costs could be thousands of dollars for a tested procedure.

The result? Often the patient chooses not to have the care at all, care that they may truly need. Alternatively, when an employer offers a direct contract or alternative network to plan members, the out-of-pocket cost is much lower or even zero. Sometimes the arrangement even includes covering travel costs for the patient and a family member. That decreased out-of-pocket cost and additional benefits removes the financial barrier for the patient to receive care from the doctor that signed up for the direct contract or alternative network.

The result is that more patients get the care they need and doctors see more patient volume. Now let's move on to the second advantage. Direct contracts and alternative networks pay more than Medicare. 25% more, 50% more, sometimes 100% more than Medicare. The payment amount may be less than what traditional insurance contracts offer, but it's much better than Medicare. And remember, Medicare Advantage plans through an insurance carrier essentially reimburse the same or even less than traditional Medicare. So with the growth of Medicare Advantage, you are not going to see improvement in your payer mix.

I have another video on that whole issue of Medicare Advantage versus traditional Medicare reimbursement, so check out the link in the description if you haven't seen it. And now for the final benefit of moving to an alternative network. Direct contracts and alternative networks pay much faster than traditional health insurance carriers. The typical time period for payment from traditional insurance carriers is anywhere from 30 to 70 days. That's over two months from when you submit a bill. Now the insurance carrier may say they pay faster, but you need to track your accounts receivable days to see how much outstanding revenue you have that is still unpaid.

Conversely, direct contracts and alternative networks pay in as little as two weeks, giving your practice the cash flow it needs to pay its own bills. Let's take a look at how this works in practice. Mercy Hospital in Springfield, Missouri, has direct contracts with multiple employers, including Walmart, Lowe's, JetBlue, and McKesson. Health plan members at these companies have joint replacements and spine surgery with the orthopedic surgeons at Mercy for $0 out of pocket. Additionally, Mercy has dedicated care navigators that arrange travel and hotel accommodations for the patient and a family member, with all expenses paid by the employer at no cost to the patient.

The result, the patients receive great care at no cost to them, their employers save money through better surgical outcomes and lower complication rates, and the doctors at Mercy have higher patient volume from a payer that pays more than Medicare. Doctors, you can provide care to more patients who need it, get paid more than Medicare, and get paid faster. But it requires doing things differently. Are you ready to change? Consider joining the Nomi Open Health Network. To learn more, check out the link in the video description.

I'm Dr. Eric Bricker, and this is Healthcare Uncovered, where we break down a broken system..

