Title: Why Hospitals Cry Poor_ Cross-Subsidization Explained_eXnV1exjsxs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eXnV1exjsxs
Language: en
Duration: 10:02
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is why hospitals will always cry poor. Now we're going to start off with a true story and this is the story of Rick. Now Rick is an elderly gentleman that lives in my community. I'm going to guess and say that he's in his mid-70s. Now Rick has Parkinson's disease. Now it's pretty mild and yes he has sort of the associated tremor. Now Rick never married and he lives on his own in an apartment. Okay so it's pretty good. He's living independently in his mid-70s with Parkinson's.

Now Rick gets pneumonia and has to be hospitalized and it turns out that he has to go into the ICU. His pneumonia becomes severe enough that actually it spreads from his lungs into his bloodstream and he has a bloodstream infection. And so he is and I hear about this through friends of friends that Rick is hospitalized. Okay now I don't hear anymore. About two months later I run into Rick at the grocery store and guess what? Rick looks great. I mean he is um like I catch him kind of right as he's walking off the curb and he handles the curb just fine.

He sticks out his hand to shake mine to say hello. I mean oftentimes when seniors um you know get pneumonia and they become hospitalized a lot of times they get delirium and they their their brains their cognitive function kind of decreases and it doesn't come back very quickly. It can last months. And Rick was super sharp and he looked great. So what's my point? My point is that was a miracle. A gentleman in the 70s with Parkinson's disease having pneumonia that spread that spread to his bloodstream. Like in many situations in the not too recent past like that was a death sentence and he was able to survive.

It was a miracle frankly what the hospital and the nurses and the physicians and the respiratory therapists and all the staff were able to accomplish. It's a wonderful thing. Now let's get down to the finances of Rick's hospital stay. Okay so his hospitalization probably this are just rough estimates of what the costs are right. So his hospitalization probably cost like the actual cost to the hospital was probably about a hundred thousand dollars. Now Medicare probably reimbursed the hospital for that uh for that stay about fifty thousand dollars which means that that hospital lost about fifty thousand dollars for Rick's hospital stay.

Now multiply no the hospital sees people like Rick with a chronic disease who get pneumonia and end up in the ICU they see them all the time. I would see patients like that all the time. So let's just multiply that by five Ricks because it's very common for hospitals to get five Ricks sometimes on a daily basis. That means the hospital is going to lose two hundred and fifty thousand dollars for those five Ricks. Now let's see what the hospital does to manage losing two hundred and fifty thousand dollars and I'm going to use the example of scoliosis but you could replace it with another hospital service as well.

So scoliosis is a is a lateral curvature of the spine and it can act and it typically happens in young women and it can be actually remedied through extensive spine surgery like super extensive spine surgery can be used to actually straighten the spine. Okay fine. So the actual cost now it's actually about a you have to go to the ICU after the surgery is done but the people generally recover pretty quickly and they're generally out of the ICU within about 24 hours and then you know maybe a five-day hospital stays total.

So let's say that the actual cost for the scoliosis surgery is fifty thousand dollars for the hospital to actually perform that surgery. Now most people with scoliosis are are kind of women you know between the ages of you know in their teens to kind of let's say early 40s or late 30s right so they're typically going to be an employer-sponsored plan so it's actually going to cost that employer-sponsored plan 352,000 uh 352,000 dollars for that. Now why the 352,000? Well it's administered through a health insurance plan which is allowed to have a loss ratio of 85 percent which means that when you take the 352,000 uh multiply it by 0.85 that gets you to 300,000 so that's the contracted rate that the hospital has negotiated with Blue Cross United Cigna Aetna for that scoliosis surgery and these scoliosis surgeries can easily cost that much.

So the um the employer plus the uh the insurance combined pays out the 352,000 dollars which after you take out the loss ratio gets you down to 300,000 dollars so it actually costs the hospital 50,000 dollars to perform it so that's the negative 50,000 and plus the 300,000 means that they made the hospital made 250 grand for the scoliosis surgery. So that 250 grand from the scoliosis surgery uh offsets the 250,000 loss from the five ricks with pneumonia and that process is referred to as cross-subsidization.

So all hospitals in America use cross-subsidization to make up for Medicare underpayment. In this case it was 250,000 dollars of Medicare underpayment. Now note in order for this cross-subsidization occurs it costs about 52,000 dollars in administration costs. That's the 15% in the loss ratio which is why it ends up costing actually 350, uh 352,000 because you have to take into account the 52,000 in administrative costs that goes to the insurance company that goes to their employees that goes to their marketing that pros to that pays that goes to paying brokers and consultants their commissions that goes to their profit margin.

So what that means is is that in order to administer this cross-subsidization as it exists today for every 250,000 dollars in Medicare underpayment there is 52.9 thousand dollars of administrative costs. In other words 21% if you take uh 52,900 dollars divided by 250,000 dollars that gets you 21% so in other words this employer-sponsored welfare this employer-sponsored cross-subsidization of Medicare payment of Medicare underpayment has an administrative cost that's about 21%. You can think of that as the friction in the system of of the of the money that's being lost to to facilitate this process.

Now keep in mind insurance carriers want this to happen right because the more expensive the the more Medicare underpayment to the hospitals the more the hospitals have to overcharge their employers which means that the insurance companies get to keep 15% of a larger number. So right now this structure is what exists today this employer welfare state of cross-subsidization of Medicare underpayment is good for insurance carriers and oh by the way it's also good for brokers and benefits consultants that the insurance carriers pay to facilitate this process.

Now we're going to talk about the alternative so you still have the five ricks costing two hundred and fifty thousand dollars to the hospital but instead the hospital can actually run its own health insurance company whether it be and there's there's hospitals in America that run their own health insurance companies. I've made plenty of videos about them in the past. Now in that situation that actually incentivizes the hospital to try to decrease the cost of the ricks to decrease this hundred thousand dollars per brick.

It actually incentivizes the hospital to actually try to decrease the fifty thousand dollars that it actually costs to perform the scoliosis surgery and it incentivizes the hospital to actually decrease the fifty two thousand nine hundred dollars of administrative costs. So when a hospital owns the insurance plan it actually aligns the incentives of the hospital that's administering the care to actually do so in a more cost effective fashion. Now I will tell you that that is a hugely daunting task. That is the reason why more hospitals in America haven't done it is because one it's really hard to do and two frankly they don't want to do it.

So it's an incredibly daunting task. The vast majority of hospitals in America they lack the will and they lack the skill they don't have the people processes or tools to be able to do that. Now what's the alternative? The alternative is what they do today which is one they cry poor and they lobby to the government and to medicare to try to increase that reimbursement as much as humanly possible and then they also cry poor to the insurance companies and the employer welfare state for health care in America to increase that 352.9 thousand dollars as much as they can.

So what's the point? The point is that we see hospitals crying poor. This is why hospitals cry poor and they will continue to cry poor until they decide to address the hugely daunting task of actually establishing their own health insurance companies. Now will they do that? When will they do that? That's to be decided. But now you understand why hospitals will cry poor. And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

