Title: Why Fixing Fraud Has to Come First for Employee Health Plans_Pdwq_enNhGg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=enNhGg
Language: en
Duration: 4:02
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Health Care Z. Today's topic is fraud has to come first and I wrote this about 10% because Marshall Allen from ProPublica has now written multiple articles about fraud on employee health plans. So in other words, for commercial insurance and it's estimated that it's as high as 10%. So I'm going to go through why this is so important for all of us. It's because reducing and eliminating employee health plan fraud is the number one priority of the health plan because it does not require employee behavior change, right? One of the things that is constantly talked about with whether it be point solutions or wellness, you name it.

We cannot get the employees to change their behavior. Okay, reducing fraud is something that we can do without changing employee behavior. Next, it does not require provider behavior change. We talk about over utilization and over prescription by doctors and over testing and over procedures. Okay, that's going to require doctors to change their behavior. That is really hard to do. Okay, reducing fraud does not require us to change doctor's behavior. Okay, next up, it gives the employer credibility to ask for future change.

Now, we've talked about how you whether it's using an onsite near site clinic, whether it's using centers of excellence for things like spine surgery, I mean, these things require behavior change. And likewise, if we're going to do like value based payments for doctors and providers, like that requires behavior change. Okay, can we really ask the employees and the doctors to change their behavior? When we in running our own health plan, haven't reduced our or eliminate the fraud? I mean, that just needs to come first.

So I mean, we have because if you came to me as an employee, because I guarantee you, employees have read the Marshall Allen articles in ProPublica. And if you came to me as an employee, and you said, you have to change your behavior, I'd be like, have you read this article by Marshall Allen? Because it tells me that there are fraudulent things going on in our plan. Maybe we should fix those first. I guarantee you, you have smart employees on your plan. that know this. Okay, now, there's a few ways that we can reduce or eliminate fraud.

We can catch it beforehand, and we can stop payment on it. Okay, I will not get into the details of how to do that today. But that is one option. Another option is to catch the fraud after it has occurred. Now, if you catch it after it's occurred, there are two methods of recourse. One is to withhold future payments to that particular hospital system or provider. Be like, okay, well, there was $10,000 worth of fraud. Okay, Well, we've got $10,000 more dollars worth of bills here that you say that we owe you. We're just not going to pay you that extra $10,000.

Okay, or you're going to have to sue them to get the money back. Okay, none of those is easy. But hey, oftentimes, doing the right thing is not easy. Okay, now, the health plan has to clean its side of the street first, before we ask employees, or dependents, of behavior. I mean, that 10% could only be 1%. That's not the point. The point is, is because then we go to these constituents, and we ask for behavior change, then we've already done our homework first. And that's super important, because without credibility, we're not going to get anywhere.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching. Hey, I'm Kearzy..

