Title: Why CEOs Dont Care About Healthcare_mNDTOlnDppI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNDTOlnDppI
Language: en
Duration: 5:39
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today we're going to be discussing why CEOs don't care about healthcare. Now this is not meant to be a cynical discussion. This is very serious. Now, fixing healthcare is a matter of will, not skill, not ability. And we have talked about that on multiple occasions here on A Healthcare Z where John Tortoise and Sarah Graff, they essentially fixed healthcare for their company. And Marilyn Bartlett and the state of Montana essentially fixed healthcare costs for their state.

And the Allegheny School System in the Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania area, they essentially fixed their healthcare costs. So there's different ways to go about doing this, but like we know how to do it. It can be done. It's just a matter of will, of actually doing it. Okay, so for employer-sponsored health plans, where does the will of the organization come from? It comes from the CEO and the board of directors. They set the priority. Okay, let's look at the motivation of a CEO. Well, CEO compensation is largely based on stock and stock options.

I'll leave a link in the show notes to a New York Times article about the highest paid CEOs. But as you go down the list, almost all of them, the vast majority of their compensation is in stock and stock options. Like, not 40%, not 50%, but like 80 to 90% of their overall compensation is in the stock. Okay, so fine. It is what it is. That's the prioritization because you want the CEO to act like an owner. So you want to make them an owner as much as possible. Okay, what drives the stock price? Well, for publicly traded companies, the stock price is largely determined by revenue, not by earnings per share.

And one of the basis for that is that when a company beats on earnings per share in its quarterly reporting, oftentimes the stock price will go down. So if there is a decrease in revenue, if there is a decrease in another growth stack, and I'll leave a link in the show notes, but this particular article talks about like for internet companies, if a decrease in users happens, or for oil companies, if they decrease in output from an oil rig or land available to drill on. Okay. And then also for guidance. So even if they beat on the earnings, even if they do well on the revenue, but they say, hey, going forward, revenue is going to go down, then the stock price is going to go down.

Therefore, the CEO's compensation is really tied to revenue and growth. Okay, fine. Fixing healthcare is not a revenue or growth issue. It is an earnings issue. And in fact, there is an opportunity cost for every minute that a CEO thinks about healthcare. They are not thinking about sales and marketing and product and growing the company. So I'm not saying CEOs are wrong for that. I'm just saying that's how they're motivated. That's how they're compensated. That's how it is. Okay, what are the implications of that? That means that groups of employer-sponsored health plans that actually do care are private companies that do not have to publish their earnings and their revenue, that do not have short-term shareholders that need to be pleased.

And that's the example of John Tornis. So John Tornis was not only the CEO of Seragraph, he was like one of the largest owners of Seragraph, if not the exclusive owner of Seragraph. Now, when I've heard John Tornis speak, he didn't talk about how much of Seragraph he owned. But the point is, he owned a lot of it. Okay, so he had a long-term vision for what he wanted Seragraph to be, and he cared about earnings. And I even talked about how he increased the size, the enterprise value of Seragraph because he increased their earnings, because he cared about that.

Okay, next up. Governments. The state of Montana, they cared. Why do they care? They can't just, quote-unquote, increase revenue. It's really hard for them to raise taxes, right? So not only state governments, but city governments, county governments, smaller municipal entities, they really care. And you see that a lot of the innovation in healthcare is happening actually in the government space. Not federal, but those other levels. Next up. School systems really care. Again, the Allegheny school systems. This is where more and more money has to be spent on teacher and staff healthcare.

That doesn't go towards books. That doesn't go towards the school buildings. It doesn't go towards the teacher's salary. So absolutely for school systems, healthcare is eating away, and they care. And the Allegheny school system, they care. So, if you are interested in lowering healthcare costs, don't pay attention to what large publicly traded corporations say. Let's pay attention to what they do. And what they do is not particularly care about healthcare. Now, that may be a controversial statement for me to make.

That's okay if you have a different opinion. But that's my point for today. And thank you for watching it, HealthcareZ. Thank you..

