Title: Why Doctors Take Money from Pharmaceutical Companies_2-yGFRrm08A
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2-yGFRrm08A
Language: en
Duration: 5:57
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is fake pharma education, doctors, and UAWs or under accumulators of wealth. So what in the world is going on here? So Novartis, which is one of the large pharmaceutical companies in the country, just performed a settlement with the federal government of the United States for $678 million for activities by their sales representatives between 2002 and 2011, where, like many drug companies, Novartis had speaker programs and fancy dinners where they would wine and dine physicians and they would have a physician speaker who was paid under the guise of some sort of educational event.

But there was very little to no education going on. And this was just what essentially amounted to almost like bribery in giving these doctors these very nice dinners and these speaking opportunities in exchange for prescribing a lot of Novartis medications. So it was frauds. They got caught by the feds. They had to pay the settlement. Now, it got so bad that sometimes these events didn't even occur. So there was one, I'll leave a link in the show notes to the story, there was one example where the Novartis representative created fake receipts from a restaurant and just paid the speaker for not even speaking at all.

The event didn't even happen. So this is, by the way, the third largest pharmaceutical company in the world. And I say this to be like, look, this is like the most mainstream of the mainstream. This is not some fringe pharmaceutical company. I mean, this is one of the biggest and one of the oldest. Okay? They do $47 billion a year in revenue. There are three blockbuster drugs. Are Cosentix, which is for psoriasis, Galenia, which is for multiple sclerosis, and Lucentis, which is for diabetic retinopathy and macular degeneration.

So this gets me thinking, okay, so Novartis gets in trouble. What about all the physicians who were going to the fancy dinners and being paid as speakers? They knew what was going on. They didn't have any recourse at all. They didn't get in trouble. But what does this say about the physician mentality when it comes to money? And so this does not describe all physicians. It doesn't even necessarily describe a majority of physicians. But it probably describes a significant minority, let's say 20 to 30 percent of physicians, in my experience, in terms of how they think about money.

It's a little screwy. Okay? So you've got to remember that physicians make a ton of money, right? A quarter of a million dollars, half a million dollars a year. However, when they were in high school and in college, a lot of their friends, because a lot of physicians are hardworking, very intelligent people, they have a lot of hardworking, very intelligent friends, that went on to become powerful corporate attorneys. They went on to Wall Street, investment banks, hedge funds, businesses. And they, their friends, start making a ton of money in their 20s and 30s.

Meanwhile, physicians remain poor in their 20s and 30s. Because they're going to medical school and they're doing residency. And it's not just into their 20s. It's well into their 30s, especially if they do a fellowship after their residency. So they get this sense of, like, relative deprivation, where they see all of their, quote, unquote, peers in non-medical professions that are making all this money and these houses and these vacations. And they're sitting here in this dumpy apartment in this used car, not able to start a family a lot of the time.

So I'm not asking anybody to feel sorry for physicians, but it does something screwy to their mentality so that when they do get out of their fellowship or their residency and they start getting a big check, then not only do they have debt, but they just start to spend, spend, spend. And that gets me to the final point, which is the book The Millionaire Next Door from the 1990s. Many of you have probably read this book where they talk about underaccumulators of wealth. In other words, people that make a ton of money, but they just don't have a lot of wealth because they spend it all.

And what is the A number one example that they give The Millionaire Next Door for the prototypical underaccumulator of wealth? It's doctors. That's exactly right. And, you know, and so they always, you know, physicians oftentimes will hide behind, oh, you know, it's all this medical school debt. And don't get me wrong, I'm not trying to downplay that. But a lot of them, too, are spend, spend, spend. I mean, one of the doctors at the hospital I work, he drove a Bentley. I'm not sure he needed to drive a Bentley.

Okay? So now, when it comes to the actual, let's just say fraudulent whining and dining under the guise of medical education, it's hard, right? Because regulation for physicians is done at the state level. It's not done at the federal level. So each state medical board kind of has its own way of dealing with these things. Okay? So it's highly balkanized. Next, open payments, which was started by CMS after the Affordable Care Act was passed, that actually displays, so pharmaceutical companies have to log how much money they're giving to physicians by name.

And you can go to openpayments.cms.gov and you can actually look up, type in, you can type in my name, you can type in any doctor's name and you can see how much money they've been receiving from pharmaceutical companies. So that's relatively recent, 2013, right? This has been going on for decades. So it's just important to know that when physicians are making decisions and when pharmaceutical companies are marketing their products, that there is a mentality within a significant minority of physicians that allows them to be, you know, arguably corrupted by the sales techniques of some pharmaceutical companies.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching A Healthcare Seed..

