Title: Winners and Losers in Healthcare... How to Make Patients Win_jz7Vdrufr-s
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jz7Vdrufr-s
Language: en
Duration: 6:47
Upload Date: Unknown

Transcription:

Hello, this is Dr. Eric Bricker and thank you for watching A Healthcare Z. Today's topic is winners and losers in healthcare. Now, I have a list here of the winners in the current healthcare environment. Insurance carriers are winning. Hospitals are winning. Pharmaceutical companies are winning. Insurance brokers and benefits consultants are winning. Medical device companies are winning. PBMs are winning. And doctors are winning. I don't sum here because obviously some are winning more than others. It's not like universal winning.

But in general, they're winning. Okay, now, who's losing? Who are the losers in healthcare? Patients are losing. Employees are losing. Employers are losing. Governments are losing. And so, if healthcare is going to change, if it's going to improve, we need to have the losers, the end users, the customers, the people that we exist for, the patients. They need to win a lot more than they're currently winning. Okay, I think everybody agrees with that. Everyone's trying to help employers win. Yada, yada, yada. Okay, what does that mean? That means that these winners need to lose.

We need to measure progress by some of the winners losing. So, what do I mean by that? Let me give you a couple examples. So, obviously, with the opioid epidemic, one of the things that is in the news constantly, that almost every American knows about, is Purdue Pharma. Okay, Purdue Pharma right now is losing. They used to be a huge winner. They are losing. Okay, now, the death toll from opioid overdoses had been going up every single year. And for the first year ever, it was just reported that it has come down for the first time.

It didn't come down a lot. It just came down a little. So, it's just the beginning of patients who were losing, maybe starting to turn the corner a little bit. But, aha, so, there is a winner who is losing and a loser who is starting to win. Example number two, McGowan, Texas doctors. So, many of you may remember how Dr. Atul Gawande, who's now the head of Hangman Healthcare, he wrote these amazing articles in The Atlantic about the excess prices and the excess utilization of healthcare services in McGowan, Texas.

He went down there and he was like, whoa, this is crazy. People were getting admitted for all these services. They were getting all these surgeries. They were getting all this whole healthcare. And healthcare in McGowan, Texas was incredibly expensive. Now, after he wrote those exposés, things dramatically changed in McGowan, Texas. And as a result, Medicare costs went down $3,000 per beneficiary to the tune of $500 million, half a billion dollars saved in Medicare. Inpatient hospitalizations went down. Home healthcare went down.

Ambulance services went down. And I'll leave a link in the show notes to a fantastic article that explains how this happened and how, in many ways, the primary care physicians in McGowan, Texas drove this dramatic change. But here we have many hospitals and many specialist physicians and many home health agencies. They lost. They became losers. And the patients and the employers and Medicare in McGowan started to win. All right. Which gets us to the point of creative destruction. In order for progress to happen, there has to be creative destruction.

So if we all agree that there needs to be progress and change in healthcare, then we cannot have that unless we have creative destruction. And the key word there in creative destruction is the word destruction. Okay? Let me give you an example of that. Okay. Nokia and Motorola used to be the cell phone producers in America. In the late 90s and early 2000s, everybody had Nokia and Motorola cell phones. Okay. Now, we know... No one uses Nokia and Motorola cell phones anymore. Not because they didn't want to. Not because these companies didn't want to sell them anymore.

It's because their cell phones became obsolete. We made progress and moved into smartphones. And as a result, there was essentially the destruction of these companies' cell phone business. So, my point to you today is that there needs to be a major destruction going out of business for a major insurance carrier in America. Maybe we'll see progress. Maybe it's a sign of progress when one of the major insurance carriers in America goes out of business. Maybe it's progress when a major hospital system goes out of business.

Maybe it's progress when a major brokerage house or benefits consulting firm goes out of business. I mean, because I can tell you today, I literally just had breakfast with a broker yesterday. Or still, it was two days ago. And he said, look, I know this other broker who's making half a million dollars in commissions and fees off of one group. Half a million dollars off of one group. He's got a lot more than one group. Like, this group is not that big. And he's making half a million dollars a year. Arguably, that needs some creative destruction.

Okay. Likewise, I was talking to a surgeon whose friend works for the property division of a major hospital system. And he says they can't rent space in all of their buildings. They have gobs and gobs of unused space. Because they have built so many buildings that they can't fill them. Okay. With all that extra money as a non-profit that they have, they've built gazillions of buildings and they can't fill them. Okay. Again, that is ripe for creative destruction. So, all I'm saying today is that as we push the ball down the field, a marker of success will actually be the observation of the winners becoming losers.

And that's my point for today. Thank you for watching a Healthcare Z..

